FThe process of projection transforms the Earth’s surface to a plane, and the outcome is a map projection, ready to be used for a projected coordinate system. P P The map shows the interstate highways in Idaho and TAhe map shows the connected interstate Montana based on different coordinate systems. networks based on the same coordinate system. R Geographic Coordinate System: The geographic coordinate system is the reference system for locating spatial features O on the Earth’s surface. The geographic coordinate system is defined by longitude and latitude. Both longitude and latitude are angular measures: longitude measures the angle east C or west from the prime meridian, and latitude measures the angle north or south of the equatorial plane. For example, the longitude at point X is the angle a west of the prime U meridian, and the latitude at point Y is the angle b north of the equator. T S The geographic coordinate system. Meridians are lines of equal longitude. The prime meridian passes through Greenwich, England, and has the reading of 0°. Using the prime meridian as a reference, we can measure the longitude value of a point on the Earth’s surface as 0° to 180° east or west of the prime meridian. Meridians are therefore used for measuring location in the E–W direction. Parallels are lines of equal latitude. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I The flattening is based on the difference between the semimajor axis a and the semiminor axis b. The angular measures of longitude and latitude may be expressed in degrees-minutes- seconds (DMS), decimal degrees (DD), or radians (rad). Given that 1 degree equals 60 minutes and 1 minute equals 60 seconds, we can

convert betweePn DMS and DD. For example, a latitude value of 45°52'30" would be equal to 45.875° (45 + 52/60 + 30/3600). P Radians are typically used in computer programs. One radian equals 57.2958°, and one degree equals 0.01745 rad. A Map Projections: R A map projection transforms the geographic coordinates on an ellipsoid into locations on a plane. The outcome of this transformation process is a systematic arrangement of O parallels and meridians on a flat surface representing the geographic coordinate system. A map projection provides a couple of distinctive advantages. First, a map projection allows us C to use two-dimensional maps, either paper or digital. Second, a map projection allows us to work with plane coordinates rather than longitude and latitude values. U Map projections can be grouped by either the preserved property or the projection surface. Cartographers group map projections by the preserved property into the following T four classes: conformal, equal area or equivalent, equidistant, and azimuthal or true direction. A conformal projection preserves local angles and shapes. An equivalent projection S represents areas in correct relative size. An equidistant projection maintains consistency of scale along certain lines. And an azimuthal projection retains certain accurate directions. The preserved property of a map projection is often included in its name, such as the Lambert conformal conic projection or the Albers equal-area conic projection. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I P Case and projection P A map projection is defined by its parameters. Typically, a map projection has five or more A parameters. A standard line refers to the line of tangency between the projection surface and the reference globe. The standard line is called the standard parallel if it follows a parallel, and the standard meridian if it

follows a meridian. The principal scale, or the scale of the R reference globe, can be derived from the ratio of the globe’s radius to the Earth’s radius (3963 miles or 6378 kilometers). The scale factor is the normalized local scale, defined as the O ratio of the local scale to the principal scale. The false easting is the assigned x-coordinate value and the false northing is the assigned y-coordinate value. Essentially, the false easting C and false northing create a false origin so that all points fall within the NE quadrant and have positive coordinateUs. The following are the commonly used map projections: Transverse Mercator, Lambert Conformal Conic, Albers Equal-Area Conic, Equidistant Conic, Web Mercator. T S Projected Coordinate Systems: A projected coordinate system is built on a map projection. Projected coordinate systems and map projections are often used interchangeably. For example, the Lambert conformal conic is a map projection but it can also refer to a coordinate system. In practice, however, projected coordinate systems are designed for detailed calculations and positioning, and are typically used in large-scale mapping such as at a scale of 1:24,000 or larger. Accuracy in a feature’s location and its position relative to other features is therefore a key consideration in the design of a projected coordinate system. To maintain the level of accuracy desired for measurements, a projected coordinate system is often divided into different zones, with each zone defined by a different projection center. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I (a) (b) P The Projected Coordinate System (a): Representation of points in Geographic Coordinate System (b): Equivalent representation in Projected coordinate system P Three coordinate systems are commonly used in the United States: the Universal Transverse Mercator (UTM) grid system, the Universal Polar

Stereographic (UPS) grid A system, and the State Plane Coordinate (SPC) system. R O C U T S Example Coordinate Systems World Geodetic System (WGS-84) is familiar to many non-geographers because it is used by GPS devices to describe locations all over the Earth. A different GCS, called OSGB- 36, which is more accurate for describing locations in Britain but not as good for other countries, is used specifically for British data. Web Mercator is a PCS based on WGS-84 used for global maps, and British National Grid is a PCS based on OSGB-36 used for British maps. Converting between coordinate systems that are based on the same GCS is relatively straightforward, but when converting, for example, GPS (WGS-84) coordinates to BNG, a mathematical transformation is required. The "Petroleum" transformation is an accurate transformation from WGS-84 to OSGB-36. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I COMPONENTS OF GIS: A GIS is an organized collection of computer hardware, software, geographic data, and personnel designed to efficiently capture, store, update, manipulate, analyze, and display all forms of geographically referenced information. GIS technology integrates common database operations, such as query and statistical analysis, with the unique visualization and geographic analysis benefits offered by maps. A working GIS integrates the following key components: hardware, software, data, people, and methods. o Hardware - GIS hardware includes computers for data prPocessing, data storage, and input/output; printers and plotters for reports and hard-copy maps; digitizers P and scanners for digitization of spatial data; and GPS (Global Positioning System) and mobile devices for fieldwork. A o Software - GIS software, either commercial or open source, includes programs and applications to be executed by a computer for data management, data analysis, data display, and other tasks.R Additional applications, written in Python,

JavaScript, VB.NET, or C++, may be used in GIS for specific data analyses. o Method - A successfulO GIS operates according to a well-designed plan and business rules, which are the models and operating practices unique to each organization. AnCy organization has documented their process plan for GIS operation. These document address number question about the GIS methods: U number of GIS expert required, GIS software and hardware, Process to store the data, what type of DBMS (database management system) and more. Well T designed plan will address all these questions. o People - GIS technology is of limited value without the people who manage the S system and to develop plans for applying it. GIS users range from technical specialists who design and maintain the system, to those who use it to help them do their everyday work. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I P P o Data - Maybe the most important component of a GIS is the data. Geographic A data and related tabular data can be collected in-house or bought from a commercial data provider. Most GIS employ a DBMS to create and maintain a R database to help organize and manage data. The data that a GIS operates on consists of any data bearing a definable relationship to space, including any data O about things and events that occur in nature. At one time this consisted of hard- copy data, like traditional cartographic maps, surveyor’s logs, demographic C statistics, geographic reports, and descriptions from the field. Advances in spatial data collection, classification, and accuracy have allowed more and more standard U digital base-maps to become available at different scales. o Organization - GIS operations exist within an organizational environment; T therefore, they must be integrated into

the culture and decision-making processes of the organization for such matters as the role and value of GIS, GIS training, S data collection and dissemination, and data standards. WORKING OF GIS: GIS consists of the following elements i.e. geospatial data, data acquisition, data management, data display, data exploration, and data analysis.  Geospatial Data: By definition, geospatial data cover the location of spatial features. To locate spatial features on the Earth’s surface, we can use either a geographic or a projected coordinate system. A geographic coordinate system is expressed in longitude and latitude and a projected coordinate system in x, y coordinates. Many RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I projected coordinated systems are available for use in GIS. A GIS represents geospatial data as either vector data or raster data. The vector data model uses x, y coordinates to represent point features P The vector data model uses points, lines, and polygons to represent spatial features P with a clear spatial location and boundary such as streams, land parcels, and vegetation stands. Each feature is assigned an ID so that it can be associated with its A attributes. The raster data model uses a grid and grid cells to represent spatial features: point R features are represented by single cells, line features by sequences of neighbouring cells, and polygon features by collections of contiguous cells. The cell value O corresponds to the attribute of the spatial feature at the cell location. Raster data are ideal for continuous features such as elevation and precipitation. C U T The raster data model uses cells in a grid to represent point features S A vector data model can be georelational or object-based, with or without topology, and simple or composite. The georelational model stores

geometries and attributes of spatial features in separate systems, whereas the object-based model stores them in a single system. Topology explicitly expresses the spatial relationships between features, such as two lines meeting perfectly at a point.  Data Acquisition: Data acquisition is usually the first step in conducting a GIS project. The need for geospatial data by GIS users has been linked to the development of data clearinghouses and geoportals. Since the early 1990s, government agencies at RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I different levels in the United States as well as many other countries have set up websites for sharing public data and for directing users to various data sources. Data acquisition involves compilation of existing and new data. To be used in a GIS, a newly digitized map or a map created from satellite images requires geometric transformation (i.e., geo-referencing). Additionally, both existing and new spatial data must be edited if they contain digitizing and/or topological errors. P  Attribute Data Management: A GIS usually employs a database management system P (DBMS) to handle attribute data, which can be large in size in the case of vector data. Each polygon in a soil map, for example, can bAe associated with dozens of attributes on the physical and chemical soil properties and soil interpretations. Attribute data are stored in a relational database as a collection of tables. These tables can be prepared, R maintained, and edited separately, but they can also be linked for data search and retrieval. O  Data Display: A rouCtine GIS operation is mapmaking because maps are an interface to GIS. Mapmaking can be informal or formal in GIS. It is informal when we view U geospatial data on maps, and formal when we produce maps

for professional presentations and reports. A professional map combines the title, map body, legend, scaleT bar, and other elements together to convey geographic information to the map reader. S To make a “good” map, we must have a basic understanding of map symbols, colors, and typology, and their relationship to the mapped data. Additionally, we must be familiar with map design principles such as layout and visual hierarchy. After a map is composed in a GIS, it can be printed or saved as a graphic file for presentation. It can also be converted to a KML file, imported into Google Earth, and shared publicly on a web server.  Data Exploration: Data exploration refers to the activities of visualizing, manipulating, and querying data using maps, tables, and graphs. These activities offer a close look at the data and function as a precursor to formal data analysis. Data RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I exploration in GIS can be map or feature-based. Map-based exploration includes data classification, data aggregation, and map comparison. Feature-based query can involve either attribute or spatial data. Attribute data query is basically the same as database query using a DBMS. In contrast, spatial data query allows GIS users to select features based on their spatial relationships such as containment, intersect, and proximity. A combination of attribute and spatial data queries provides a powerful tool for data exploration. P P  Data Analysis: A GIS has a large number of tools for data analysis. Some are basic tools, meaning that they are regularly used by GIS users. Other tools tend to be A discipline or application specific. Two basic tools for vector data are buffering and overlay: buffering creates buffer zones from select features, and overlay combines the geometries

and attributes of the inputR layers. O C U A vector-based overlay operation combines geometries and Tattributes from different layers to create the output. Four basic tools for raster data are local, neighbourhood, zonal, and global operations, Sdepending on whether the operation is performed at the level of individual cells, or groups of cells, or cells within an entire raster. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I P P A Basic operation of Raster Data GIS SOFTWARE PRODUCTS: R The below table shows a select list of commercial GIS software in the left column and free and open source software (FOSS) for GIS in the right column. O C U T S ArcGIS is composed of applications and extensions at three license levels. The applications include ArcMap,ArcGIS Pro, ArcCatalog, ArcScene, and ArcGlobe, and the RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I extensions include 3D Analyst, Network Analyst, Spatial Analyst, Geostatistical Analyst, and others. GRASS GIS (Geographic Resources Analysis Support System), the first FOSS for GIS, was originally developed by the U.S. Army Construction Engineering Research Laboratories in the 1980s. Well known for its analysis tools, GRPASS GIS is currently maintained and developed by a worldwide network of users. Academicians, government P agencies (NASA, NOAA, USDA and USGS) and GIS practitioners use this open source software because its code can be inspected and tailored to their needs. A SAGA GIS (System for Automated Geoscientific Analyses) is one of the classics in the world of free GIS software. It started out primarily for terrain analysis such as R hillshading, watershed extraction and visibility analysis. Now, SAGA GIS is a powerhouse because it delivers a fast growing set of geoscientific methods to the geoscientific O community. GeoDa

is a free GIS software program primarily used to introduce new users into C spatial data analysis. Its main functionality is data exploration in statistics. One of the nicest things about it is how it comes with sample data for you to give a test-drive. From simple U box-plots all the way to regression statistics, GeoDa has complete arsenal of statistics to do nearly anything spatially. T APPLICATION OF GIS: S GIS is a useful tool because a high percentage of information we routinely encounter has a spatial component. An often cited figure among GIS users is that 80 percent of data is geographic. Since its beginning, GIS has been important for land use planning, natural hazard assessment, wildlife habitat analysis, riparian zone monitoring, timber management, and urban planning. The list of fields that have benefited from the use of GIS has expanded significantly for the past three decades. In the United States, the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS) is a leading agency in the development and promotion of GIS. The USGS website provides case studies as well as geospatial data for applications in climate and land use change, ecosystem analysis, geologic mapping, petroleum resource assessment, watershed management, coastal zone management, RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I natural hazards (volcano, flood, and landslide), aquifer depletion, and ground water management. In the private sector, most GIS applications are integrated with the Internet, GPS, wireless technology, and Web services. The following shows some of these applications:  Online mapping websites offer locators for finding real estate listings, vacation rentals, banks, restaurants, coffee shops, and hotels.  Location-based services allow mobile phone users to search for nearby banks, restaurants, and taxis; and to track friends, dates, children, and tPhe elderly.  Mobile GIS allows field

workers to collect and access geospatial data in the field. P  Mobile resource management tools track and manage the location of field crews and mobile assets in real time. A  Automotive navigation systems provide turn by-turn guidance and optimal routes based on precise road mapping using GPS and camera. R  Augmented reality lets a smart phone user look through the phone’s camera with superimposed data or images (e.g., 3-D terrain from a GIS, monsters in Pokemon Go) O about the current location. C SCALES/LEVELS OF MEASUREMENTS: Scales of Measurement or level of measurement is a system for classifying attribute U data into four categories namely nominal, ordinal, interval and ratio.  Nominal: In this level of measurement, the numbers in the variable are used only to T classify the data. In this level of measurement, words, letters, and alpha-numeric Ssymbols can be used. Suppose there are data about people belonging to three different gender categories. In this case, the person belonging to the female gender could be classified as F, the person belonging to the male gender could be classified as M, and transgendered classified as T. This type of assigning classification is nominal level of measurement.  Ordinal: This level of measurement depicts some ordered relationship among the variable’s observations. Suppose a student scores the highest grade of 100 in the class. In this case, he would be assigned the first rank. Then, another classmate scores the second highest grade of an 92; she would be assigned the second rank. A third student scores a 81 and he would be assigned the third rank, and so on. The ordinal level of measurement indicates an ordering of the measurements. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- I P P A

R Levels of Measurements  Interval: The interval level of measurement not only classifies and orders the O measurements, but it also specifies that the distances between each interval on the scale are equivalent along the scale from low interval to high interval. For C example, an interval level of measurement could be the measurement of anxiety in a student betwUeen the score of 10 and 11, this interval is the same as that of a student who scores between 40 and 41. A popular example of this level of measurement is temTperature in centigrade, where, for example, the distance between 940C and 960C is the same as the distance between 1000C and 1020C. S  Ratio: In this level of measurement, the observations, in addition to having equal intervals, can have a value of zero as well. A common geographic example of ratio data is density (i.e. population, ethnicity, etc.). Any percent value from 0 to 100 will have a meaningful zero. ***** RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II UNIT II SPATIAL DATA MODELS Database Structures – Relational, Object Oriented – ER diagram - spatial data models – Raster Data Structures – Raster Data Compression - Vector Data Structures - Raster vs Vector Models- TIN and GRID data models - OGC standards - Data Quality. DATABASE MODEL: P Data model defines the logical structure of a database. Data Models are fundamental entities to introduce abstraction in a DBMS. Data models defPine how data is connected to each other and how they are processed and stored inside the system. There are a number of A different database data models. Amongst those that have been used for attribute data in GIS are the hierarchical, network, relational, object-relational and object-oriented data models. Of

these the relational data model has become the most widely used model. R Relational Data Model: O Data are organized in a series of two-dimensional tables, each of which contains records for one entity. These tables are linked by common data known as keys. Queries are C possible on individual tables or on groups of tables. For the Happy Valley data, the below figure illustrates an example of one such table. U T S Relational database table data for Happy Valley The data in a relational database are stored as a set of base tables with the characteristics described above. Other tables are created as the database is queried and these represent virtual views. The table structure is extremely flexible and allows a wide variety of queries on the data. Queries are possible on one table at a time (for example, you might ask ‘which hotels have more than 14 rooms?’ or ‘which hotels are luxury standard?’), or on more than one table by linking through key fields (for instance, ‘which passengers originating from the UK are staying in luxury hotels?’ or ‘which ski lessons have pupils who are over 50 years DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II of age?’). Queries generate further tables, but these new tables are not usually stored. There are few restrictions on the types of query possible. P Database terminology applied to Happy Valley table With many relational databases querying is facilitated by menu systems and icons, or P ‘query by example’ systems. Frequently, queries are built up of expressions based on relational algebra, using commands such as SELECT (tAo select a subset of rows), PROJECT (to select a subset of columns) or JOIN (to join tables based on key fields). SQL (standard query language) has been developed to facilitate

the querying of relational databases. The R advantages of SQL for database users are its completeness, simplicity, pseudo English- language style and wide application. However, SQL has not really developed to handle O geographical concepts such as ‘near to’, ‘far from’ or‘connected to’. C ER Diagram: An Entity–relationship model (ER model) describes the structure of a database with U the help of a diagram, which is known as Entity Relationship Diagram (ER Diagram). An ER model is a design or blueprint of a database that can later be implemented as a database. ER T Model is best used for the conceptual design of a database. The main components of E-R model are: S  Entity − An entity in an ER Model is a real-world entity having properties called attributes. Every attribute is defined by its set of values called domain. For example, in a school database, a student is considered as an entity. Student has various attributes like name, age, class, etc.  Relationship − The logical association among entities is called relationship. Relationships are mapped with entities in various ways. Mapping cardinalities define the number of association between two entities. The following are the Mapping cardinalities - one to one, one to many, many to one & many to many. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II The following are the various symbols used in ER diagram: P P A R O C U T S DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II The figure shows the ER diagram for the GPS tracking system. The design has three entities namely User-generated Data, Publisher and Subscriber. P P A R ER Diagram of GPS System O SPATIAL DATA MODEL: C Raster Data Model: The raster spatial data model is one of

a family of spatial data models described as U tessellations. In the raster world individual cells are used as the building blocks for creating images of point, line, area, network and surface entities. In the raster world the basic building T block is the individual grid cell, and the shape and character of an entity is created by the grouping of cells. The size of the grid cell is very important as it influences how an entity S appears. Representation of Spatial Features: The vector data model uses the geometric objects of point, line, and polygon to represent spatial features. A point has zero dimension and has only the property of location. A point feature is made of a point or a set of points. Wells, benchmarks, and gravel pits on a topographic map are examples of point features. A line is one-dimensional and has the property of length, in addition to location. A line has two end points and may have additional points in between to mark the shape of the line. polygon is two-dimensional and has the properties of area (size) and perimeter, in addition to location. Made of connected, closed, nonintersecting lines, the perimeter or the boundary defines the area of a polygon. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II Topology: Topology refers to the study of those properties of geometric objects that remain invariant under certain transformations such as bending or stretching. An example of a topological map is a subway map. A subway map depicts correctly the connectivity between the subway lines and stations on each line but has distortions in distance and direction. In GIS, vector data can be topological or non-topological, depending on whether topology is buiPlt into the data or not. Topology can be explained through directed graphs

(digraphs), which show the arrangements P of geometric objects and the relationships among objects. An edge or arc is a directed line with a starting point and an ending point. The end points of an arc are nodes, and A intermediate points, if any, are vertices. And a face refers to a polygon bounded by arcs. If an arc joins two nodes, the nodes are said to be adjacent and incident with the arc. R TIGER: O An early application example of topology is the Topologically Integrated Geographic Encoding and Referencing C(TIGER) data base from the U.S. Census Bureau. The TIGER database links statistical area boundaries such as counties, census tracts, and block groups to U roads, railroads, rivers, and other features by topology. T S Topology in the TIGER database involves nodes, arcs and faces. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II Topology has three main advantages. First, it ensures data quality and integrity. Second, topology can enhance GIS analysis. Third, topological relationships between spatial features allow GIS users to perform spatial data query. Vector Data Model: A vector spatial data model uses two-dimensional Cartesian (x,y) co-ordinates to store the shape of a spatial entity. In the vector world the point is the basic building block from which all spatial entities are constructed. The simplest spatial entity, thPe point, is represented by a single (x,y) co-ordinate pair. Line and area entities are constructed by connecting a P series of points into chains and polygons. The more complex the shape of a line or area feature the greater the number of points A required to represent it. Selecting the appropriate number of points to construct an entity is one of the major dilemmas when using the vector approach. R O C U T S Raster and

vector spatial data If too few points are chosen the character, shape and spatial properties of the entity (for example, area, length, perimeter) will be compromised. If too many points are used, unnecessary duplicate information will be stored and this will be costly in terms of data capture and computer storage. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II P P Effect of changing resolution in the vector and raster worlds A SPATIAL DATA STRUCTURES: Data structures provide the information that the computer requires to reconstruct the R spatial data model in digital form. There are many different data structures in use in GIS. This diversity is one of the reasons whyO exchanging spatial data between different GIS software can be problematic. However, despite this diversity data structures can be classified according to whether they are used to structure raster or vector data. C Raster data structUures: In the raster world a range of different methods is used to encode a spatial entity for storage and Trepresentation in the computer. The below figure shows the most straightforward method of coding raster data. The cells in each line of the image (Figure: a) are mirrored by S an equivalent row of numbers in the file structure (Figure: c). The first line of the file tells the computer that the image consists of 10 rows and 10 columns and that the maximum cell value is 1. In this example, a value of 0 has been used to record cells where the entity is not present and a value of 1 for cells where the entity is present (Figure: b). A simple raster data structure DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II In a simple raster data structure, such as illustrated in the above figure, different

spatial features must be stored as separate data layers. Thus, to store more raster entities, separate data files would be required, each representing a different layer of spatial data. However, if the entities do not occupy the same geographic location (or cells in the raster model), then it is possible to store them all in a single layer, with an entity code given to each cell. This code informs the user which entity is present in which cell. P P A R Feature coding of cells in the raster world O Above figure shows how different land uses can be coded in a single raster layer. The values C 1, 2 and 3 have been used to classify the raster cells according to the land use present at a given location. The value 1 represents residential area; 2, forest; and 3, farmland. U One of the major problems with raster data sets is their size, because a value must be recorded and stored for each cell in an image. Thus, a complex image made up of a mosaic of T different features (such as a soil map with 20 distinct classes) requires the same amount of storagSe space as a similar raster map showing the location of a single forest. To address this problem a range of data compaction methods have been developed. Vector Data Structure: There are many potential vector data structures that can be used to store the geometric representation of entities in the computer. The simplest vector data structure that can be used to reproduce a geographical image in the computer is a file containing (x,y) co-ordinate pairs that represent the location of individual point features (or the points used to construct lines or areas). DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II Data

structures in the vector world: simple point dictionary data structure P P The above figure shows such a vector data structure for the Happy Valley car park. Note how a closed ring of co-ordinate pairs defines the boundary of the polygon. The A limitations of simple vector data structures start to emerge when more complex spatial entities are considered. For example, consider the Happy Valley car park divided into different parking zones (Figure: b). The car Rpark consists of a number of adjacent polygons. If the simple data structure, illustrated in Figure: a, were used to capture this entity then the O boundary line shared between adjacent polygons would be stored twice. This may not appear too much of a problem in the case of this example, but consider the implications for a map of C the 50 states in the USA. The amount of duplicate data would be considerable. This method can be improved U by adjacent polygons sharing common co-ordinate pairs (points). To do this all points in the data structure must be numbered sequentially and contain an explicit reference which records T which points are associated with which polygon. This is known as a point dictionary. The data structure in Figure: b, shows how such an approach has been used to store data for the S different zones in the Happy Valley car park. There is a considerable range of topological data structures in use by GIS. All the structures available try to ensure that:  no node or line segment is duplicated;  line segments and nodes can be referenced to more than one polygon;  all polygons have unique identifiers; and  island and hole polygons can be adequately represented. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II RASTER DATA COMPRESSION: Data

compression refers to the reduction of data volume, a topic particularly important for data delivery and Web mapping. Data compression is related to how raster data are encoded. Quadtree and RLE, because of their efficiency in data encoding, can also be considered as data compression methods. A variety of techniques are available for data compression. They can be lossless or lossy. A lossless compression preserves the cell or pixel values and allows the original raster or image to be precisely reconstructed. Therefore, lossless compressioPn is desirable for raster data that are used for analysis or deriving new data. RLE is an example of lossless P compression. Other methods include LZW (Lempel—Ziv-Welch) and its variations (e.g., LZ77,LZMA). A A lossy compression cannot reconstruct fully the original image but can achieve higher compression ratios than a lossless compression. Lossy compression is therefore useful R for raster data that are used as background images rather than for analysis. Image degradation through lossy compression can affect GIS-related tasks such as extracting ground control O points from aerial photographs or satellite images for the purpose of georeferencing. Run length encoding: C Run length encoding stores cells on a row-by-row basis. Instead of recording each individual cell’s values, run length encoding groups cell values by row. U T S Block coding: The block coding raster storage technique assigns areas that are blocks to reduce redundancy. The block coding raster image compression method subdivides an entire raster image into hierarchical blocks. It’s an extension of the run length encoding technique, but extends it to two dimensions. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II Chain Coding: Chain coding defines the outer boundary using relative positions from a start point. The sequence of the exterior is stored where the endpoint finishes at the start point.

During the encoding, the direction is stored as an integer. However, in this example we use cardinal directions for simplicity. For example, the value 0 is north and 1 is east. P P Quadtree encoding: A Quadtrees are raster data structures based on the successive reduction of homogeneous cells. It recursively subdivides a raster image into quarters. The subdivision process continues until each cell is classed. R O C MrSID uses the wavelet transform for data compression. The wavelet-based U compression is also used by JPEG 2000 and ECW (Enhanced Compressed Wavelet). The wavelet transform treats an image as a wave and progressively decomposes the wave into T simpler wavelets (Addison 2002). Using a wavelet (mathematical) function, the transform repetitively averages groups of adjacent pixels (e.g., 2, 4, 6, 8, or more) and, at the same time, S records the differences between the original pixel values and the average. The differences, also called wavelet coefficients, can be 0, greater than 0, or less than 0. In parts of an image that have few significant variations, most pixels will have coefficients of 0 or very close to 0. To save data storage, these parts of the image can be stored at lower resolutions by rounding off low coefficients to 0, but storage at higher resolutions is required for parts of the same image that have significant variations (i.e., more details). Box 4.4 shows a simple example of using the Haar function for the wavelet 3transform. DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II The Haar wavelet and the wavelet transform. P (a) Three Haar wavelets at three scales (b) A simple example of the wavelet (resolutions). Ptransform. A VECTOR vs RASTER: Vector Raster Usually Complex. RUsually Simple. Difficult for overlay operation. Efficient for overlay operation. High spatial variability

is inefficienOtly High spatial variability is efficiently represented. represented. Small file size. C Large file size. Vector data model is often used for Raster data model is widely used for U representing discrete features with representing continuous spatial features. definable boundaries. T Example: Example: S DIGITAL TERRAIN MODELLING: The abbreviation DTM is used to describe a digital data set which is used to model a topographic surface (a surface representing height data). To model a surface accurately it would be necessary to store an almost infinite number of observations. Since this is impossible, a surface model approximates a continuous surface using a finite number of DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II observations. Thus, an appropriate number of observations must be selected, along with their geographical location. The ‘resolution’ of a DTM is determined by the frequency of observations used. DTMs are created from a series of either regularly or irregularly spaced (x,y,z) data points (where x and y are the horizontal co-ordinates and z is the vertical or height co-ordinate). DTMs may be derived from a number of data sources. These include contour and spot height information found on topographic maps, stereoscopic aerial photography, satellite images and field surveys. P Triangulated Irregular Networks: P A commonly used data structure in GIS software is the triangulated irregular network (TIN). It is on the standard implementation techniques for digital terrain models, but it can be A used to represent any continuous field. The principles behind a TIN are simple. It is built from a set of locations for which we have a measurement for instance an elevation. The locations can be arbitrarily scattered in spacRe and are usually not on a nice regular grid. Any location together with its elevation value can be viewed as a point

in three dimensional space. This is illustrated in below figureO. From these 3D points, we can construct an irregular tessellation made of triangles. C U T Input locations and their (elevation) values for a TIN construction. S In three-dimensional space, three points uniquely determine a plane, as long as they not collinear, i.e. they must not be positioned on the same line. A plane fitted through these points has a fixed aspect and gradient and can be used to compute an approximation f elevation of other locations. Since we pick many triples of points, we can construct many such planes and therefore we can have many elevation approximations for a single location such as `P`. So, it is wise to restrict the use of a plane to the triangular area between the three points. If we restrict the use of a plane to the area between its three anchor points, we obtain a triangular tessellation of the complete study space. Unfortunately, there are many different tessellations for a given input set of anchor points. Some tessellations are better than others, in the sense that they make smaller errors of elevation approximation. For instance, it we base DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II our elevation computation for location `P` on the left hand shaded triangle, we will get another value than from the right hand shaded triangle. The second will provide a better approximation because the average distance from `P` to the three triangle anchors is smaller. The triangulation shown in below figure happens to be a Delaunay triangulation, which in a sense is an optimal triangulation. There are multiple ways of defining what such a triangulation is, but we suffice here to state two important properties. The first is that the triangles are as equilateral

(‘equal-sided’) as they can be, given the set of anchor points. The second property is that for each triangle, the circumcircle through its thPree anchor points does not contain any other anchor point. One such circumcircle is depicted on the right of Figure P (b). A R O Two triangulations based on the input locations (a) one with many ‘stretched’ triangles; (b) the triangles are more equilateral – Delaunay triangulation. C A TIN clearly is a vector representation: each anchor point has a stored georeference. Yet, we might also call it an irregular tessellation, as the chosen triangulation provides a U partitioning of the entire study space. However, in this case, the cells do not have an associated stored value as is typical of tessellations, but rather a simple interpolation function T that uses the elevation values of its three anchor points. S GIS DATA STANDARDS: The number of formats available for GIS data is almost as large as the number of GIS packages on the market. This makes the sharing of data difficult and means that data created on one system is not always easily read by another system. This problem has been addressed in the past by including data conversion functions in GIS software. These conversion functions adopt commonly used exchange formats such as DXF and E00. Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC): There is still no universally accepted GIS data standard, although the Open Geospatial Consortium (OGC), formed in 1994 by a group of leading GIS software and data DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II vendors, is working to deliver spatial interface specifications that are available for global use (OGC, 2001). The OGC has proposed the Geography Markup Language (GML) as a new GIS data standard. The Geography Markup Language (GML) is a non-proprietary

computer language designed specifically for the transfer of spatial data over the Internet. GML is based on XML (eXtensible Markup Language), the standard language of the Internet, and allows the exchange of spatial information and the construction of distributed spatial relationships. GML has been proposed by the Open Geospatial ConsortiumP as a universal spatial data standard. GML is likely to become very widely used because it is: P  Internet friendly;  not tied to any proprietary GIS; A  specifically designed for feature-based spatial data;  open to use by anyone; R  compatible with industry-wide IT standards. It is also likely to set the standard for the delivery of spatial information content to O PDA and WAP devices, and so form an important component of mobile and location-based (LBS) GIS technologies. The collection of geoportals and various other compliemntary C services, create a Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI). U Spatial Data Infrastructure (SDI): An SDI is used to represent all the components that enable access to spatial data T including relevant technologies, policies and institutional arrangements. Using electronic media, SDIs connect nationally distributed repositories of geospatial information and make S them available on a device through a single entry point often referred to as a 'geoportal'. They facilitate data providers and users to participate in the digital spatial community at a national scale and provide a basis for spatial data discovery, evaluation and application for users within government, commercial and non-profit sectors, and academia and by citizens in general. The Global Spatial Data Infrastructure (GSDI) Association links national SDIs to establish a connection for all users in the world to share and reuse the available datasets. Data Accuracy: In GIS, data quality is used to give an indication of how good data are. It describes the overall fitness or

suitability of data for a specific purpose or is used to indicate data free from errors and other problems. Examining issues such as error, accuracy, precision and bias DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- II can help to assess the quality of individual data sets. In addition, the resolution and generalization of source data, and the data model used, may influence the portrayal of features of interest. Data sets used for analysis need to be complete, compatible and consistent, and applicable for the analysis being performed. Accuracy is the extent to which an estimated data value approaches its true value (Aronoff, 1989). If a GIS database is accurate, it is a true representation of reality. It is impossible for a GIS database to be 100 per cent accurate, though it is possible to have data that are accurate to within specified tolerances. For example, a ski lift sPtation co-ordinate may be accurate to within plus or minus 10 metres. P Several types of error can arise when accuracy and/or precision requirements are not met during data capture and creation. The five types of error in a geospatial dataset are A related to - Positional Accuracy: The identification of positional accurRacy is important. This includes consideration of inherent error (source error) and operational error (introduced error). A more detailed review is provided in the next section. O Attribute Accuracy: Consideration of the Caccuracy of attributes also helps to define the quality of the data. This quality component concerns the identification of the reliability, or level of purity U (homogeneity), in a data set. Logical Consistency: T This component is concerned with determining the faithfulness of the data structure for a data set. This typically involves spatial data inconsistencies such as incorrect line S intersections, duplicate lines or

boundaries, or gaps in lines. These are referred to as spatial or topological errors. Completeness: The final quality component involves a statement about the completeness of the data set. This includes consideration of holes in the data, unclassified areas, and any compilation procedures that may have caused data to be eliminated. ***** DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III UNIT III DATA INPUT AND TOPOLOGY Scanner - Raster Data Input – Raster Data File Formats – Vector Data Input –Digitiser – Topology - Adjacency, connectivity and containment – Topological Consistency rules – Attribute Data linking – ODBC – GPS - Concept GPS based mapping. Introduction: Data encoding is the process of getting data into the computer. IPt is a process that is fundamental to almost every GIS project. For example: P  An archaeologist may encode aerial photographs of ancient remains to integrate with newly collected field data. A  A planner may digitize outlines of new buildings and plot these on existing topographical data. R  An ecologist may add new remotely sensed data to a GIS to examine changes in habitats. O  A historian may scan historical maps to create a virtual city from the past.  A utility company may encode changes in pipeline data to record changes and C upgrades to their pipe network. U Once in a GIS, data almost always need to be corrected and manipulated to ensure that they can be structured according to the required data model. Problems that may have to T be addressed at this stage of a GIS project include:  the re-projection of data from different map sources to a common projection; S  the generalization of complex data to provide a simpler data set; or  the matching and joining of adjacent

map sheets once the data are in digital form. This unit looks in detail at the range of methods available to get data into a GIS. These include keyboard entry, digitizing, scanning and electronic data transfer. Then, methods of data editing and manipulation are reviewed, including re-projection, transformation and edge matching. The whole process of data encoding and editing is often called the ‘data stream’. Analogue data are normally in paper form, and include paper maps, tables of statistics and hard-copy (printed) aerial photographs. These data all need to be converted to digital RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III form before use in a GIS, thus the data encoding and correction procedures are longer than those for digital data. Digital data are already in computer-readable formats and are supplied on CD-ROM or across a computer network. Map data, aerial photographs, satellite imagery, data from databases and automatic data collection devices (such as data loggers and GPS) are all available in digital form. P P A R O C U T Figure: The Data Stream S SCANNER: Scanning coverts paper maps into digital format by capturing features as individual cells, or pixels, producing an automated image. Maps are generally considered the backbone of any GIS activity. But many a time paper maps are not easily available in a form that can be readily used by the computers. Most of the paper maps had been prepared on the basis of old conventional surveys. New maps can be produced using improved technologies but this requires time as it increases the volume of work. Thus, we have to resort to the available maps. These paper maps have to be first converted into a digital format usable by the computer. This is a critical step as

the quality of the analog document must be preserved in the transition to the computer domain. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III The technology used for this kind of conversions is known as scanning and the instrument used for this kind of operation is known as a scanner. A scanner can be thought of as an electronic input device that converts analog information of a document like a map, photograph or an overlay into a digital format that can be used by the computer. Scanning automatically captures map features, text, and symbols as individual cells, or pixels, and produces an automated image. Working of a Scanner: P The most important component inside a scanner is the scanner head which can move P along the length of the scanner. The scanner head contains either a charged-couple device (CCD) sensor or a contact image (CIS) sensor. A CCD consists of a number of photosensitive A cells or pixels packed together on a chip. The most advanced large format scanners use CCD’s with 8000 pixels per chip for providing a very good image quality. While scanning a bright white light fRrom the scanner strikes the image to be scanned and is reflected onto the photosensitive surface of the sensor placed on the scanner head. Each pixel transfers a gray tone vaOlue (values given to the different shades of black in the image ranging from 0 (black) – 255 (white) i.e. 256 values to the scan board (software). The software interprets the valCue in terms of 0 (Black) or 1 (white), thereby, forming a monochrome image of the scanned portion. As the head moves ahead, it scans the image in U tiny strips and the sensor continues to store the information in a sequential fashion.

The software running the scanner pierces together the information from the sensor into a digital T form of the image. This type of scanning is known as one pass scanning. Scanning a colour image is slightly different in which the scanner head has to scan the S same image for three different colours i.e. red, green, blue. In older colour scanners, this was accomplished by scanning the same area three times over for the three different colours. This type of scanner is known as three-pass scanner. However, most of the colour scanners now scan in one pass scanning all the three colours in one go by using colour filters. In principle, a colour CCD works in the same way as a monochrome CCD. But in this each colour is constructed by mixing red, green and blue. Thus, a 24-bit RGB CCD presents each pixel by 24 bits of information. Usually, a scanner using these three colours (in full 24 RGB mode) can create up to 16.8 million colours. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Types of Scanners: Hand-held scanners although portable, can only scan images up to about four inches wide. They require a very steady hand for moving the scan head over the document. They are useful for scanning small logos or signatures and are virtually of no use for scanning maps and photographs. The most commonly used scanner is a flatbed scanner also known as desktop scanner. It has a glass plate on which the picture or the document is placed. The scanner head placed beneath the glass plate moves across the picture and the result is aP good quality scanned image. For scanning large maps or top sheets wide format flatbed scanners can be used. P A R

O C U T Figure: Types of Scanners S Then there are the drum scanners which are mostly used by the printing professionals. In this type of scanner, the image or the document is placed on a glass cylinder that rotates at very high speeds around a centrally located sensor containing photo-multiplier tube instead of a CCD to scan. Prior to the advances in the field of sheet fed scanners, the drum scanners were extensively used for scanning maps and other documents. RASTER GIS FILE FORMATS: Raster data is made up of pixels (also referred to as grid cells). They are usually regularly-spaced and square but they don’t have to be. Rasters have pixel that are associated with a value (continuous) or class (discrete). RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Extension File Type Description ERDAS Imagine IMG files is a proprietary file format developed by Hexagon Geospatial. IMG files are commonly used for raster data to store single and multiple bands of satellite data. IMG files use a hierarchical format (HFA) that are optional to store basic information about the file. For example, this can include file ERDAS Imagine (IMG) .IMG information, ground control points and sensor type. P Each raster layer as part of an IMG file contains P information about its data values. For example, this includes projection, statistics, attributes, pyramids aAnd whether or not it’s a continuous or discrete type of raster. ASCII uses a set of numbers (including floats) between 0 and 255 for information storage and R processing. They also contain header information with a set of keywords. American Standard Code for O Information Interchange .ASC In their native form, ASCII text files store GIS ASCII Grid data in a delimited format. This could be comma,

space or tab-delimited format. Going C from non-spatial to spatial data, you can run a conversion process tool like ASCII to raster. U The GeoTIFF has become an industry image standard file for GIS and satellite remote sensing applications. GeoTIFFs may be accompanied by T other files: S  TFW is the world file that is required to .TIF give your raster geolocation. GeoTIFF .TIFF  XML optionally accompany GeoTIFFs .OVR and are your metadata.  AUX auxiliary files store projections and other information.  OVR pyramid files improves performance for raster display. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III IDRISI assigns RST extensions to all raster layers. They consist of numeric grid cell values as integers, real numbers, bytes and RGB24. The raster documentation file (RDC) is a .RST IDRISI Raster companion text file for RST files. They assign .RDC the number of columns and rows to RST files. Further to this, they record the file type, coordinate system, reference units and positional error. Band Interleaved files are a raster storage P extension for single/multi-band aerial and satellite imagery. P  Band Interleaved for Line (BIL) stores pixelA information based on rows for all bands in an image. .BIL  Whereas Band interleaved by pixel (BIP) Envi RAW Raster .BIP assigns pixel values for each band by .BSQ R rows.  Finally, Band sequential format (BSQ) stores separate bands by rows. O BIL files consist of a header file (HDR) that describes the number of columns, rows, bands, C bit depth and layout in an image. Grid files are a proprietary format developed by U Esri. Grids have no extension and are unique because they can hold attribute data in a raster file. But the catch is that you can only

add T attributes to integer grids. Attributes are stored in a value attribute tables S (VAT) – one record for each unique value in the grid, and the count representing the number of Esri Grid cells. The two types of Esri Grid files are integer and floating point grids. Land cover would be an example of a discrete grid. Each class has a unique integer cell value. Elevation data is an example of a floating point grid. Each cell represents an elevation floating value. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III VECTOR GIS FILE FORMATS: Vector data is not made up of grids of pixels. Instead, vector graphics are comprised of vertices and paths. The three basic symbol types for vector data are points, lines and polygons (areas). P P A R O C U T S RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Extension File Type Description The shapefile is BY FAR the most common geospatial file type you’ll encounter. All commercial and open source accept shapefile as a GIS format. It’s so ubiquitous that it’s become the industry standard. Esri Shapefile .SHP, But you’ll need a complete set of three files .DBF, that are mandatory to maPke up a shapefile. The .SHX three required files are: P  SHP is the feature geometry.  SHX is the shape index position. A  DBF is the attribute data. The G eoJSON format is mostly for web-based Rmapping. GeoJSON stores coordinates as text in JavaScript Object Notation (JSON) form. This includes vector points, lines and polygons Oas well as tabular information. GeoJSON store objects within curly braces {} C.GEOJSON and in general have less markup overhead Geographic JavaScript Object .JSON (compared to GML). GeoJSON

has Notation (GeoJSON) straightforward syntax that you can modify in U any text editor. Webmaps browsers understand JavaScript so T by default GeoJSON is a common web format. But JavaScript only understands binary objects. Fortunately, JavaScript can convert S JSON to binary. GML allows for the use of geographic coordinates extension of XML. And eXtensible Markup Language (XML) is both human-readable and machine-readable. GML stores geographic entities (features) in the form of text. Similar to GeoJSON, GML Geography Markup Language .GML can be updated in any text editor. Each feature (GML) has a list of properties, geometry (points, lines, curves, surfaces and polygons) and spatial reference system. There is generally more overhead when compare GML with GeoJSON. This is because GML results in more data for the same amount of information. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III KML stands for Keyhole Markup Language. This GIS format is XML-based and is primarily used for Google Earth. KML was developed by Keyhole Inc which was later acquired by Google. KMZ (KML-Zipped) replaced KML as being the default Google Earth geospatial format Google Keyhole Markup .KML because it is a compressed version of the file. Language (KML/KMZ) .KMZ KML/KMZ became an international standard of the Open Geospatial Consortium in 2008. P The longitude, latitude components (decimal degrees) are as dePfined by the World Geodetic System of 1984 (WGS84). The vertical component (altitude) is measured in meters A from the WGS84 EGM96 Geoid vertical datum. GPS E xchange format is an XML schema that Rdescribes waypoints, tracks and routes captured from a GPS receiver. Because GPX is an exchange format, you can openly transfer OGPS data from one program to another based GPS eXchange Format (GPX) .GPX on its description properties. CThe minimum requirement for

GPX are latitude and longitude coordinates. In addition, GPX files optionally stores location properties U including time, elevation and geoid height as tags. IDRISI vector data files have a VCT extension T along with an associated vector documentation file with a VDC extension. S VCT format are limited to points, lines, .VCT polygons, text and photos. Upon the creation IDRISI Vector .VDC of an IDRISI vector file, it automatically creates a documentation file for building metadata. Attributes are stored directly in the vector files. But you can optionally use independent data tables and value files. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III DIGITIZING: Digitizing in GIS is the process of converting geographic data either from a hardcopy or a scanned image into vector data by tracing the features. During the digitzing process, features from the traced map or image are captured as coordinates in either point, line, or polygon format. P Types of Digitizing in GIS: P The most common method of encoding spatial features from paper maps is manual digitizing. It is an appropriate technique when selected features are required from a paper A map. Manual digitizing requires a digitizing table that is linked to a computer workstation. The digitizing table is essentially a large flat tablet, the surface of which is underlain by a very fine mesh of wires. Attached to the digRitizer via a cable is a cursor (puck) that can be moved freely over the surface of the table. Buttons on the cursor allow the user to send instructions to the computer. The poOsition of the cursor on the table is registered by reference to its position above the wire mesh. C U T S Figure: Manual Digitizer Heads up digitizing (also referred to as on-screen digitizing) is

the method of tracing geographic features from another dataset (usually an aerial, satellite image, or scanned image of a map) directly on the computer screen. Automated digitizing involves using image processing software that contains pattern recognition technology to generated vectors. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III The procedure followed when digitizing a paper map using a manual digitizer has the following five stages:  Registration: The map to be digitized is fixed firmly to the table top with sticky tape. Five or more control points are identified (usually the four corners of the map sheet and one or more grid intersections in the middle). The geographic co-ordinates of the control points are noted and their locations digitized by positioning the cross-hairs on the cursor exactly over them and pressing the ‘digitize’ button on the cursor. This sends the co-ordinates of a point on the table to the computer aPnd stores them in a file as ‘digitizer co-ordinates’. P  Digitizing point features: Point features, for example spot heights, hotel locations or meteorological stations, are recorded as a single digitized point. A unique code A number or identifier is added so that attribute information may be attached later. For instance, the hotel with ID number ‘1’ would later be identified as ‘Mountain View’. R  Digitizing line features: Line features (such as roads or rivers) are digitized as a series of points that the software will join with straight line segments. In some GIS packages O lines are referred to as arcs, and their start and end points as nodes. This gives rise to the term arc–node topology, used to describe a method of structuring line features. C  Digitizing area (polygon) features: Area features or polygons, for example forested areas or

administrative boundaries, are digitized as a series of points linked together U by line segments in the same way as line features. Here it is important that the start and end points join to form a complete area. Polygons can be digitized as a series of T individual lines, which are later joined to form areas. In this case it is important that each line segment is digitized only once. S  Adding attribute information: Attribute data may be added to digitized polygon features by linking them to a centroid (or seed point) in each polygon. These are either digitized manually (after digitizing the polygon boundaries) or created automatically once the polygons have been encoded. Using a unique identifier or code number, attribute data can then be linked to the polygon centroids of appropriate polygons. In this way, the forest stand may have data relating to tree species, tree ages, tree numbers and timber volume attached to a point within the polygon. Manual digitizers may be used in one of two modes: point mode or stream mode. In point mode the user begins digitizing each line segment with a start node, records each RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III change in direction of the line with a digitized point and finishes the segment with an end node. Thus, a straight line can be digitized with just two points, the start and end nodes. For more complex lines, a greater number of points are required between the start and end nodes. Smooth curves are problematic since they require an infinite number of points to record their true shape. P P A R (a) Point mode - person digitizing decides where to place each individual point such as to most accurately O represent

the line within the accepted tolerances of the digitizer. (b) Stream mode – person digitizing decides on time or distance interval between the digitizing hardware registering each point as the person digitizing moves the cursor along the line. C U In stream mode the digitizer is set up to record points according to a stated time interval or on a distance basis. Once the user has recorded the start of a line the digitizer T might be set to record a point automatically every 0.5 seconds and the user must move the cursor along the line to record its shape. An end node is required to stop the digitizer S recording further points. The speed at which the cursor is moved along the line determines the number of points recorded. Thus, where the line is more complex and the cursor needs to be moved more slowly and with more care, a greater number of points will be recorded. Conversely, where the line is straight, the cursor can be moved more quickly and fewer points are recorded. The choice between point mode and stream mode digitizing is largely a matter of personal preference. Stream mode digitizing requires more skill than point mode digitizing, and for an experienced user may be a faster method. Stream mode will usually generate more points, and hence larger files, than point mode. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III TOPOLOGY: Topology is the mathematical representation of the physical relationships that exists between the geographical elements. Topology has long been a key GIS requirement for data management and integrity. In general, a topological data model manages spatial relationships by representing spatial objects (point, line, and area features) as an underlying graph of topological primitives—nodes, faces, and edges. These primitives,

together with their relationships to one another and to the features whose boundaries they represent, are defined by representing the feature geometries in a planar graph of topological Pelements. Topology is useful in GIS because many spatial modeling operations don’t require P coordinates, only topological information. For example, to find an optimal path between two points requires a list of the arcs that connect to each other and the cost to traverse each arc in A each direction. Coordinates are only needed for drawing the path after it is calculated. The topological structure supports three major topological concepts: R  Connectivity: Arcs connect to each other at nodes.  Area definition: Arcs that coOnnect to surround an area define a polygon.  Contiguity: Arcs have direction and left and right sides. C Connectivity U Connectivity is defined through arc-node topology. This is the basis for many network tracing and path finding operations. Connectivity allows you to identify a route to the airport, T connect streams to rivers, or follow a path from the water treatment plant to a house. In the arc-node data structure, an arc is defined by two endpoints: the from-node S indicating where the arc begins and a to-node indicating where it ends. This is called arc-node topology. Figure: Arc-Node topology example RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Arc-node topology is supported through an arc-node list. The list identifies the from- and to-nodes for each arc. Connected arcs are determined by searching through the list for common node numbers. In the above example, it is possible to determine that arcs 1, 2, and 3 all intersect because they share node 11. The computer can determine that it is possible to travel along arc 1 and turn onto arc

3 because they share a common node (11), but it's not possible to turn directly from arc 1 onto arc 5 because they don't share a common node. Containment: P Many of the geographic features that may be represented cover a distinguishable area on the surface of the earth, such as lakes, parcels of land, aPnd census tracts. An area is represented in the vector model by one or more boundaries defining a polygon. Although this A sounds counterintuitive, consider a lake with an island in the middle. The lake actually has two boundaries: one that defines its outer edge and the island that defines its inner edge. In the terminology of the vector model, an island defines an inner boundary (or hole) of a R polygon. The arc-node structure represents polygons as an ordered list of arcs rather than a O closed loop of x,y coordinates. This is called polygon-arc topology. In the illustration below, polygon F is made up of arcs 8, 9, 10, and 7 (the 0 before the 7 indicates that this arc creates C an island in the polygon). U T S Figure: Polygon-Arc topology example Each arc appears in two polygons (in the above example, arc 6 appears in the list for polygons B and C). Since the polygon is simply the list of arcs defining its boundary, arc coordinates are stored only once, thereby reducing the amount of data and ensuring that the boundaries of adjacent polygons don't overlap. Contiguity: Two geographic features that share a boundary are called adjacent. Contiguity is the topological concept that allows the vector data model to determine adjacency. Polygon RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III topology defines contiguity. Polygons are contiguous to each other if they share a

common arc. This is the basis for many neighbor and overlay operations. Recall that the from-node and to-node define an arc. This indicates an arc's direction so the polygons on its left and right sides can be determined. Left-right topology refers to the polygons on the left and right sides of an arc. In the below example, polygon B is on the left of arc 6, and polygon C is on the right. Thus we know that polygons B and C are adjacent. P P A R FigurOe: Left-Right topology example Notice that the label for polygon A is outside the boundary of the area. This polygon is called the external, or unCiverse, polygon and represents the world outside the study area. The universe polygon ensures that each arc always has a left and right side defined. U Topology Rules: There are many topology rules you can implement in your geodatabase, depending on T the spatial relationships that are most important for your organization to maintain. You shoulSd carefully plan the spatial relationships you will enforce on your features. Some topology rules govern the relationships of features within a given feature class, while others govern the relationships between features in two different feature classes or subtypes. Topology rules can be defined between sub types of features in one or another feature class. This could be used, for example, to require street features to be connected to other street features at both ends, except in the case of streets belonging to the cul-de-sac or dead-end subtypes. Many topology rules can be imposed on features in a geodatabase. A well-designed geodatabase will have only those topology rules that define key spatial relationships needed by an organization. Most topology violations have fixes that you can use to correct errors. RMKCET – CSE DEPT

DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Topology rules based on points: Must Coincide With: Requires that points in one feature class (or subtype) be coincident with points in another feature class (or subtype). This is useful for cases where points must be covered by other points, such as transformers must coincide with power poles in electric distribution networks and observation points must coincide with stations. P P A Must Be Disjoint: Requires that points be separated spaRtially from other points in the same feature class (or subtype). Any points that overlap are errors. This is useful for ensuring that points are not coincident or duplicated within the sOame feature class, such as in layers of cities, parcel lot ID points, wells, or streetlamp poles. C U T S Must Be Covered By Endpoint of: Requires that points in one feature class must be covered by the endpoints of lines in another feature class. This rule is similar to the line rule Endpoint Must Be Covered By except that, in cases where the rule is violated, it is the point feature that is marked as an error rather than the line. Boundary corner markers might be constrained to be covered by the endpoints of boundary lines. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Point Must Be Covered By Line: Requires that points in one feature class be covered by lines in another feature class. It does not constrain the covering portion of the line to be an endpoint. This rule is useful for points that fall along a set of lines, such as highway signs along highways. P P A Must Be Properly Inside Polygons: Requires that points fall within area features. This is useful when the point

features are related to polygons, such as wells and weRll pads or address points and parcels. O C U Must Be Covered By Boundary of: RequTires that points fall on the boundaries of area features. This is useful when the point features help support the boundary system, such as boundary markers, which must be S found on the edges of certain areas. Topology rules based on Lines: Must Not Have Dangles: Requires that a line feature must touch lines from the same feature class (or subtype) at both endpoints. An endpoint that is not connected to another line is called a dangle. This RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III rule is used when line features must form closed loops, such as when they are defining the boundaries of polygon features. It may also be used in cases where lines typically connect to other lines, as with streets. In this case, exceptions can be used where the rule is occasionally violated, as with cul-de-sac or dead-end street segments. P P Must Not Overlap: A Requires that lines not overlap with lines in the same feature class (or subtype). This rule is used where line segments should not be duplicated, for example, in a stream feature class. Lines can cross or intersect but cannot share segments. R O C U Must Not Self-Overlap: Requires that line features not overlap themselves. They can cross or touch T themselves but must not have coincident segments. This rule is useful for features, such as streetSs, where segments might touch in a loop but where the same street should not follow the same course twice. Must Not Self-Intersect: Requires that line features not cross or overlap themselves. This rule is useful for lines, such as contour lines,

that cannot cross themselves. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Must Not Intersect : Requires that a line in one feature class (or subtype) must only touch other lines of the same feature class (or subtype) at endpoints. Any line segment in which features overlap or P any intersection not at an endpoint is an error. This rule is useful where lines must only be connected at endpoints, such as in the case of plot lines, which Pmust split (only connect to the endpoints of) back lot lines and cannot overlap each other. A R O Must Not Have Pseudo Nodes: Requires that a line connect to at least two other lines at each endpoint. Lines that C connect to one other line (or to themselves) are said to have pseudo nodes. This rule is used where line featuresU must form closed loops, such as when they define the boundaries of polygons or when line features logically must connect to two other line features at each end, as with segmTents in a stream network, with exceptions being marked for the originating ends of first-order streams. S Must Be Larger Than Cluster Tolerance: Requires that a feature does not collapse during a validate process. This rule is mandatory for a topology and applies to all line and polygon feature classes. In instances where this rule is violated, the original geometry is left unchanged. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Topology rules based on Polygons: Must Not Overlap: P Requires that the interior of polygons not overlap. The polygons can share edges or P vertices. This rule is used when an area cannot belong to two or more polygons. It is useful for modeling

administrative boundaries, such as ZIP Codes or voting districts, and mutually A exclusive area classifications, such as land cover or landform type. R O C Must Not Have Gaps: U This rule requires that there are no voids within a single polygon or between adjacent polygons. All polygons must form a continuous surface. An error will always exist on the T perimeter of the surface. You can either ignore this error or mark it as an exception. Use this rule on data that must completely cover an area. For example, soil polygons cannot include S gaps or form voids—they must cover an entire area. Contains Point: Requires that a polygon in one feature class contain at least one point from another feature class. Points must be within the polygon, not on the boundary. This is useful when every polygon should have at least one associated point, such as when parcels must have an address point. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Contains One Point: Requires that each polygon contains one point feature and that Peach point feature falls within a single polygon. This is used when there must be a one-to-one correspondence P between features of a polygon feature class and features of a point feature class, such as administrative boundaries and their capital cities. Each point must be properly inside exactly A one polygon and each polygon must properly contain exactly one point. Points must be within the polygon, not on the boundary. R O C Must Not Overlap With: U Requires that the interior of polygons in one feature class (or subtype) must not overlap with the interior of polygons in another feature class (or subtype). Polygons of the T two feature classes can share edges or vertices or

be completely disjointed. This rule is used when an area cannot belong to two separate feature classes. It is useful for combining two S mutually exclusive systems of area classification, such as zoning and water body type, where areas defined within the zoning class cannot also be defined in the water body class and vice versa. Must Cover Each Other: Requires that the polygons of one feature class (or subtype) must share all of their area with the polygons of another feature class (or subtype). Polygons may share edges or RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III vertices. Any area defined in either feature class that is not shared with the other is an error. This rule is used when two systems of classification are used for the same geographic area, and any given point defined in one system must also be defined in the other. One such case occurs with nested hierarchical datasets, such as census blocks and block groups or small watersheds and large drainage basins. The rule can also be applied to non-hierarchically related polygon feature classes, such as soil type and slope class. P P A Area Boundary Must Be Covered By Boundary of: Requires that boundaries of polygon features in one feature class (or subtype) be covered by boundaries of polygon features in another feature class (or subtype). This is useful R when polygon features in one feature class, such as subdivisions, are composed of multiple polygons in another class, such as pOarcels, and the shared boundaries must be aligned. C U T ATTRIBUTE DATA LINKING: S There are two types of GIS data: spatial data (coordinate and projection information for spatial features) and attribute data. Attribute data is additional information appended in tabular format linked with

spatial features. The attribute data is linked with spatial data through unique id (i.e. feature ID). The spatial data contains information about where and attribute data can contain information about what, where, and why. Attribute data provides characteristics about spatial data. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Figure: Attribute data and Spatial data linking P Joins: P When our data was all in a single table, we could easily retrieve a particular row from that table. But if the data we are looking for is available in two or more tables then joins can A be used to retrieve those data. Join is used to fetch data from two or more tables, which is joined to appear as single set of data. It is used for combining column from two or more tables by using values common to both tablesR. There are several types of JOINs: INNER, LEFT OUTER and RIGHT OUTER; they all do slightly different things, but thOe basic theory behind them all is the same. Inner Join: C An INNER JOIN returns a result set that contains the common elements of the tables, U i.e. the intersection where they match on the joined condition. An INNER JOIN focuses on the commonality between two tables. When using an INNER JOIN, there must be at least T some matching data between two (or more) tables that are being compared. INNER JOINs are the most frequently used JOIN operation. S RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Left Outer Join: A LEFT JOIN or a LEFT OUTER JOIN takes all the rows from one table, defined as P the left table, and joins it with a second table. A LEFT JOIN will always

include the rows from the LEFT table, even if there are no matching rows in the table it is JOINed with. P A R O C Left outer join U T S Right Outer Join: A RIGHT OUTER JOIN is similar to a LEFT OUTER JOIN except that the roles between the two tables are reversed, and all the rows on the second table are included along with any matching rows from the first table i.e. A RIGHT JOIN will always include the rows from the RIGHT table, even if there are no matching rows in the table it is JOINed with. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III P P A R O Relates: Relates can help us to discover specific information within our data. A relate (also C called a table relate) is a property of a layer. We can create a table relate so that we can query and select features in one layer and see all the related features in another layer or U table. Unlike joining tables, relating tables simply defines a relationship between two tables. The associated data isn't appended to the layer's attribute table like it is with a join. Instead, T we can access the related data through selected features or records in your layer or table. S Relation Class: A relationship class is an object in a geo-database that stores information about a relationship between two feature classes, between a feature class and a non-spatial table, or between two non-spatial tables. Both participants in a relationship class must be stored in the same geo-database. A relationship class stores information about associations among features and records in a geo-database and can help ensure your data's integrity. Relates that are added to a layer or

table in a map are essentially the same as simple relationship classes defined in a geo- database, except that they are saved with the map instead of in a geo-database. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Open Database Connectivity (ODBC): An Open Database Connectivity (ODBC) is an interface that allows applications to access data in database management systems (DBMS) using SQL as a standard for accessing the data. ODBC permits maximum interoperability, which means a single application can access different DBMS. Application end users can then add ODBC database drivers to link the application to their choice of DBMS. Application end users can then add ODBC database drivers to link the application to their choice of DBMS. P P A R O C UFigure: Architecture of ODBC The ODBC solution for accessing data led to ODBC database drivers, which are dynamic-link libraries on Windows and shared objects on Linux/UNIX. These drivers allow T an application to gain access to one or more data sources. ODBC provides a standard interfSace to allow application developers and vendors of database drivers to exchange data between applications and data sources. ODBC Driver Manager: The ODBC Driver Manager loads and unloads ODBC drivers on behalf of an application. The Windows platform comes with a default Driver Manager, while non- windows platforms have the choice to use an open source ODBC Driver Manager like unixODBC and iODBC. The ODBC Driver Manager processes ODBC function calls, or passes them to an ODBC driver and resolves ODBC version conflicts. ODBC Driver: The ODBC driver processes ODBC function calls, submits SQL requests to a specific data source and returns results to the application. The ODBC driver may also modify an RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 –

GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III application’s request so that the request conforms to syntax supported by the associated database. A framework to easily build an ODBC drivers is available from Simba Technologies, as are ODBC drivers for many data sources, such as Salesforce, MongoDB, Spark and more. The following are the steps involved in connecting application programs with the database using ODBC API:  Load ODBC driver: The forName() method of Class class is used to register the driver class. This method is used to dynamically load the driver class. P  Establish Connection: The getConnection() method of DriverManager class is used to P establish connection with the database.  Prepare and Execute SQL Statement: The createStatement() method of Connection A interface is used to create statement. The executeQuery() and execute() method is used to execute queries to the database. R  Process the result: The executeQuery() method returns the object of ResultSet that can be used to get all the records of a table. O  Close connection: The close() method is used to close the connection in order to free the allocated resource used by the connection. C The below java code is used for connecting with mysql database using ODBC application programming interface. U T S Global Positioning System: The Global Positioning System (GPS) is a U.S.-owned utility that provides users with positioning, navigation, and timing (PNT) services. This system consists of three segments: the space segment, the control segment, and the user segment. The U.S. Air Force develops, maintains, and operates the space and control segments. GPS technology was first used by the United States military in the 1960s and expanded into civilian use over the next few decades. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III Today, GPS

receivers are included in many commercial products, such as automobiles, smart phones, exercise watches, and GIS devices. P P Figure: Three Segments of GPS A Space Segment: The GPS space segment consists of a constellation of satellites transmitting radio signals to users. The United States is committed to maintaining the availability of at least 24 R operational GPS satellites, 95% of the time. To ensure this commitment, the Air Force has been flying 31 operational GPS satellites for the past few years. GPS satellites fly in medium O Earth orbit (MEO) at an altitude of approximately 20,200 km (12,550 miles). Each satellite circles the Earth twice a day. The satellites in the GPS constellation are arranged into six C equally-spaced orbital planes surrounding the Earth. Each plane contains four "slots" occupied by baselinUe satellites. This 24-slot arrangement ensures users can view at least four satellites from virtually any point on the planet. T S Figure: Constellation of satellites The Air Force normally flies more than 24 GPS satellites to maintain coverage whenever the baseline satellites are serviced or decommissioned. The extra satellites may increase GPS performance but are not considered part of the core constellation. In June 2011, the Air Force successfully completed a GPS constellation expansion known as the "Expandable 24" configuration. Three of the 24 slots were expanded, and six satellites were RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III repositioned, so that three of the extra satellites became part of the constellation baseline. As a result, GPS now effectively operates as a 27-slot constellation with improved coverage in most parts of the world. Control Segments: The GPS control segment consists of a global network of ground facilities that track the GPS satellites, monitor their transmissions, perform analyses, and send commands

and data to the constellation. The current Operational Control Segment (OPCS) includes a master control station, an alternate master control station, 11 command and control antennas, and 16 P monitoring sites. The locations of these facilities are shown in the map above. A R O C U T Figure: GPS Control Segments The GPS constellation delivers consistently high performance thanks to the dedicated S efforts of its operators — the men and women of the U.S. Air Force's 2nd Space Operations Squadron (2SOPS) and the Air Force Reserve's 19th Space Operations Squadron (19SOPS) at Schriever Air Force Base, Colorado. User Segments: Like the Internet, GPS is an essential element of the global information infrastructure. The free, open, and dependable nature of GPS has led to the development of hundreds of applications affecting every aspect of modern life. GPS technology is now in everything from cell phones and wristwatches to bulldozers, shipping containers, and ATM's. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- III GPS BASED MAPPING: The surveying and mapping community was one of the first to take advantage of GPS because it dramatically increased productivity and resulted in more accurate and reliable data. Today, GPS is a vital part of surveying and mapping activities around the world. When used by skilled professionals, GPS provides surveying and mapping data of the highest accuracy. GPS-based data collection is much faster than conventional surveying and mapping techniques, reducing the amount of equipment and labor required. A single surveyor can now accomplish in one day what once took an entire team weeks to do. GPPS supports the accurate mapping and modeling of the physical world — from mountains and rivers to streets and P buildings to utility lines and other resources. Features measured with GPS can be

displayed on maps and in geographic information systems (GIS) that store, manipulate, and display A geographically referenced data. Governments, scientific organizations, and commercial operations throughout the world use GPS and GIS technology to facilRitate timely decisions and wise use of resources. Any organization or agency that requires accurate location information about its assets can benefit from the efficiency andO productivity provided by GPS positioning. Unlike conventional techniques, GPS surveying is not bound by constraints such as line-of-sight visibility between survey stCations. The stations can be deployed at greater distances from each other and can operate anywhere with a good view of the sky, rather than being confined U to remote hilltops as previously required. GPS is especially useful in surveying coasts and waterways, where there are few land- T based reference points. Survey vessels combine GPS positions with sonar depth soundings to make the nautical charts that alert mariners to changing water depths and underwater hazards. S Bridge builders and offshore oil rigs also depend on GPS for accurate hydrographic surveys. Land surveyors and mappers can carry GPS systems in backpacks or mount them on vehicles to allow rapid, accurate data collection. Some of these systems communicate wirelessly with reference receivers to deliver continuous, real-time, centimeter-level accuracy and unprecedented productivity gains. To achieve the highest level of accuracy, most survey- grade receivers use two GPS radio frequencies: L1 and L2. Currently, there is no fully functional civilian signal at L2, so these receivers leverage a military L2 signal using "codeless" techniques. ***** RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV UNIT IV DATA ANALYSIS Vector Data Analysis tools - Data Analysis tools - Network Analysis - Digital Elevation models - 3D data collection and utilisation. VECTOR DATA ANALYSIS: The vector data model uses

points and their x-, y-coordinatPes to construct spatial features of points, lines, and polygons. These spatial features are used as inputs in vector data P analysis. Therefore, the accuracy of data analysis depends on the accuracy of these features in terms of their location and shape and whether they are topological or not. Additionally, it is A important to note that an analysis may apply to all, or selected, features in a layer. The following are the types of analysis used with vector data. R • Buffering • Overlay O • Distance Measurement • Pattern Analysis C • Feature Manipulation U Buffering: T Based on the concept of proximity, buffering creates two areas: one area that is within a specified distance of select features and the other area that is beyond. The area within the S specified distance is the buffer zone. A GIS typically varies the value of an attribute to separate the buffer zone (e.g., 1) from the area beyond the buffer zone (e.g., 0). Besides the designation of the buffer zone, no other attribute data are added or combined. Features for buffering may be points, lines, or polygons (refer below figure). Buffering around points creates circular buffer zones. Buffering around lines creates a series of elongated buffer zones around each line segment. And buffering around polygons creates buffer zones that extend outward from the polygon boundaries. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Figure: Buffering around points, Lines and polygons P Variations in Buffering: The buffer distance or buffer size does not have to be constant; it can vary according P to the values of a given field (refer below figure). For example, the width of the riparian A buffer can vary depending on its expected function and the

intensity of adjacent land use. A feature may have more than one buffer zone. As an example, a nuclear power plant may be buffered with distances of 5, 10, 15, and 20 miles, thus forming multiple rings around the R plant. Although the interval of each ring is the same at 5 miles, the rings are not equal in area. The second ring from the plant, in fact, covers an area about three times larger than the first O ring. One must consider this area difference if the buffer zones are part of an evacuation plan. Likewise, buffering around line features does not have to be on both sides of the lines; it can C be on either the left side or the right side of the line feature. (The left or right side is determined by the Udirection from the starting point to the end point of a line.) Likewise, buffer zones around polygons can be extended either outward or inward from the polygon boundaries. TBoundaries of buffer zones may remain intact so that each buffer zone is a separate polygon for further analysis. S Buffering with different buffer distance Buffering with four levels RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Regardless of its variations, buffering uses distance measurements from select features to create the buffer zones. Because buffering uses distance measurements from spatial features, the positional accuracy of spatial features in a data set also determines the accuracy of buffer zones. Applications of Buffering: Most applications of buffering are based on buffer zones. A buffer zone is often treated as a protection zone and is used for planning or regulatory purposes: P  Government regulations may set 2-mile buffer zones along streams to minimize sedimentation from logging operations. P 

A national forest may restrict oil and gas well drilling within 500 feet of roads or highways. A  A planning agency may set aside land along the edges of streams to reduce the effects of nutrient, sediment, and pesticide runoff; to maintain shade to prevent the rise of R stream temperature; and to provide shelter for wildlife and aquatic life  A planning agency may create buffer zones around geographic features such as water, O wetlands, critical habitats, and wells to be protected and exclude these zones from landfill consideration. C  Sometimes buffer zones may represent the inclusion zones in GIS applications. For example, thUe criteria for an industrial park may stipulate that a potential site must be within 1 mile of a heavy-duty road. In this case, the 1-mile buffer zones of all heavy- duty Troads become the inclusion zones.  Buffer zones can also be used as indicators of the positional accuracy of point and line S features. This application is particularly relevant for historical data that do not include geographic coordinates or data that are generated from poor-quality sources. OVERLAY: An overlay operation combines the geometries and attributes of two feature layers to create the output. The geometry of the output represents the geometric intersection of features from the input layers. Below figure illustrates an overlay operation with two simple polygon layers. Each feature on the output contains a combination of attributes from the input layers, and this combination differs from its neighbours. Feature layers to be overlaid must be spatially registered and based on the same coordinate system. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Overlay combines the geometries and attributes from two layers into a single layer. The dashed lines are for illustration only and

are not included in the output. Feature Type and Overlay: P Overlay operations can take polygon, line, or point layers as the inputs and create an output of a lower-dimension feature type. For example, given the inputs of polygon and line P layers, the output will be a line layer. Without going through all different combinations of feature types, this section covers three common overlayA operations: point-in polygon, line-in- polygon, and polygon-on-polygon. To distinguish the layers in the following discussion, the layer that may be a point, line, or polygon layer is called the input layer, and the layer that is R a polygon layer is called the overlay layer. In a point-in-polygon overlay operation, the same point features in the input layer are O included in the output but each point is assigned with attributes of the polygon within which it falls. For example, a point-in-polygon overlay can find the association between wildlife C locations and vegetation types. U T S Point-in-polygon overlay. The input is a point layer. The output is also a point layer but has attribute data from the polygon layer. In a line-in-polygon overlay operation, the output contains the same line features as in the input layer but each line feature is dissected by the polygon boundaries on the overlay layer. Thus the output has more line segments than does the input layer. Each line segment on the output combines attributes from the input layer and the underlying polygon. For example, a line-in-polygon overlay can find soil data for a proposed road. The input layer includes the proposed road. The overlay layer contains soil polygons. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Line-in-polygon overlay. The input is a line layer. The output is also a line layer.

P The most common overlay operation is polygon-on-polygon, involving two polygon P layers. The output combines the polygon boundaries from the input and overlay layers to create a new set of polygons. Each new polygon carriesA attributes from both layers, and these attributes differ from those of adjacent polygons. For example, a polygon-on-polygon overlay can analyze the association between elevation zones and vegetation types. R O Polygon-on-polygon overlay. In the illustration, the two layers for overlay have the same area extent. TChe output combines the geometries and attributes from the two layers into a single polygon layer. U Overlay Methods: The Toverlay methods are based on the Boolean connectors AND, OR, and XOR. Intersect uses the AND connector. Union uses the OR connector. Symmetrical Difference or S Difference uses the XOR connector. Identity or Minus uses the following expression: [(input layer) AND (identity layer)] OR (input layer). The following explains in more detail these four common overlay methods by using two polygon layers as the inputs. Union preserves all features from the inputs. The area extent of the output combines the area extents of both input layers. Intersect preserves only those features that falls within the area extent common to the inputs. Intersect is often a preferred method of overlay because any feature on its output has attribute data from both of its inputs. For example, a forest management plan may call for an inventory of vegetation types within riparian zones. Intersect will be a more efficient overlay method than Union in this case because the output contains only riparian zones with vegetation types. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV The Union method keeps all the areas of the two input The Intersect method preserves only the area common layers in

the output. to the two input layers in the output. Symmetrical Difference preserves features that fall within the area extent that is common to P only one of the inputs. In other words, Symmetrical Difference is opposite to Intersect in terms of the output’s area extent. P Identity preserves only features that fall within the area extent of the layer defined as A the input layer. The other layer is called the identity layer. R O The Symmetrical Difference method preserves areas The Identity method produces an output that has the common to only one of the input laCyers in the output. same extent as the input layer. But the output includes the geometry and attributes data from the identity layer. U Applications of Overlay: The overlay methods play a central role in many querying and modeling applications. T Suppose an investment company is looking for a land parcel that is zoned commercial, not subjecSt to flooding, and not more than 1 mile from a heavy-duty road. The company can first create the 1-mile road buffer and overlay the buffer zone layer with the zoning and floodplain layers. A subsequent query of the overlay output can select land parcels that satisfy the company’s selection criteria. A more specific application of overlay is to help solve the areal interpolation problem. Areal interpolation involves transferring known data from one set of polygons (source polygons) to another (target polygons). For example, census tracts may represent source polygons with known populations in each tract from the U.S. Census Bureau, and school districts may represent target polygons with unknown population data. Using overlay the population of the school districts can be calculated using the population given in the census tract. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV

An example of areal interpolation. Distance Measurement: P Distance measurement refers to measuring straight line (Euclidean) distances between features. Measurements can be made from points in a layer to points in another layer, or from P each point in a layer to its nearest point or line in another layer. In both cases, distance measures are stored in a field. Distance measures can beA used directly for data analysis. Pattern Analysis: R Pattern analysis is the study of the spatial arrangements of point or polygon features in two dimensional space. Pattern analysis uses distance measurements as inputs and statistics O (spatial statistics) for describing the distribution pattern. At the general (global) level, a pattern analysis can reveal if a point distribution pattern is random, dispersed, or clustered C A classic technique for point pattern analysis, nearest neighbour analysis uses the distance between each point and its closest neighbouring point in a layer to determine if the U point pattern is random, regular, or clustered. The nearest neighbour statistic is the ratio (R) of the observed average distance between nearest neighbours (d ) to the expected average T obs for a hypothetical random distribution (d ): exp S The R ratio is less than 1 if the point pattern is more clustered than random, and greater than 1 if the point pattern is more dispersed than random. Feature Manipulation: Tools are available in a GIS package for manipulating and managing features in one or more feature layers. When a tool involves two layers, the layers must be based on the same coordinate system. Like overlay, these feature tools are often needed for data preprocessing and data analysis; however, unlike overlay, these tools do not combine geometries and attributes from input layers into a single layer. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM

DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Dissolve aggregates features in a feature layer that have the same attribute value or values. For example, we can aggregate roads by highway number or counties by state. An important application of Dissolve is to simplify a classified polygon layer. P Dissolve removes boundaries of polygons that have Clip creates an output that contains only those the same attribute value in (a) and creates a features of the input layer that fall within the area P simplified layer (b). extent of the clip layer. The output has the same feature type as the input. A Clip creates a new layer that includes only those features of the input layer, including their attributes that fall within the area extent of the clip layer. Clip is a useful tool, for R example, for cutting a map acquired elsewhere to fit a study area. Append creates a new layer by piecing together two or more layers, which represent O the same feature and have the same attributes. For example, Append can put together a layer from four input layers, each corresponding to the area extent of a USGS 7.5-minute C quadrangle. U T AppSend pieces together two adjacent layers into a Select creates a new layer (b) with selected features single layer but does not remove the shared from the input layer (a). boundary between the layers. Select creates a new layer that contains features selected from a user-defined query expression. For example, we can create a layer showing high-canopy closure by selecting stands that have 60 to 80 percent closure from a stand layer. Eliminate creates a new layer by removing features that meet a user-defined query expression. For example, Eliminate can implement the minimum mapping unit concept by removing polygons that are

smaller than the defined unit in a layer. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Update uses a “cut and paste” operation to replace the input layer with the update layer and its features. As the name suggests, Update is useful for updating an existing layer with new features in limited areas. P Update replaces the input layer with the update Erase removes features from the input layer that fall P layer and its features. within the area extent of the erase layer. A Erase removes from the input layer those features that fall within the area extent of the erase layer. Suppose a suitability analysis stipulates that potential sites cannot be within 300 meters of any stream. A stream buffer layer can be used in this case as the erase layer to R remove itself from further consideration. Split divides the input layer Ointo two or more layers. A split layer, which shows area subunits, is used as the template for dividing the input layer. For example, a national forest can split a stand layer by disCtrict so that each district office can have its own layer. U T S Split uses the geometry of the split layer to divide the input layer into four separate layers. RASTER DATA ANALYSIS: The raster data model uses a regular grid to cover the space and the value in each grid cell to represent the characteristic of a spatial phenomenon at the cell location. This simple data structure of a raster with fixed cell locations not only is computationally efficient, but also facilitates a large variety of data analysis operations. This is why raster data are typically used in geographic information system (GIS), involving heavy computation such as building environmental models. RMKCET – CSE

DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV In contrast with vector data analysis, which uses points, lines, and polygons, raster data analysis uses cells and rasters. Raster data analysis can be performed at the level of individual cells, or groups of cells, or cells within an entire raster. Some raster data operations use a single raster; others use two or more rasters. Data Analysis Environment: Because a raster operation may involve two or more rasters, it is necessary to define the data analysis environment by specifying its area extent and outpPut cell size. The area extent for analysis may correspond to a specific raster, or an area defined by its minimum and P maximum x-, y-coordinates, or a combination of rasters. An analysis mask, either a feature layer or a raster, can also determine the area extent for analysis. A An analysis mask limits analysis to its area coverage. For example, to limit soil erosion analysis to only private lands, we can prepare a mask of either a feature layer showing private lands or a raster separatingR private lands (e.g., with a cell value of 1) from others (e.g., with a cell value of no data). O Local Operations: Constituting the coCre of raster data analysis, local operations are cell-by-cell operations. A local operation can create a new raster from either a single input raster or U multiple input rasters. The cell values of the new raster are computed by a function relating the input to the output or are assigned by a classification table. T Local Operations with a Single Raster: S Given a single raster as the input, a local operation computes each cell value in the output raster as a function of the cell value in the input raster at the same

location. The function may involve a GIS tool, a mathematical operator, and/or a constant. A large number of mathematical operators are available in a GIS package. Reclassification: A local operation, reclassification creates a new raster by classification. Reclassification is also referred to as recoding, or transforming, through lookup tables. Two reclassification methods may be used. The first method is a one-to-one change, meaning that a cell value in the input raster is assigned a new value in the output raster. For example, irrigated cropland in a land-use raster is assigned a value of 1 in the output raster. The second RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV method assigns a new value to a range of cell values in the input raster. For example, cells with population densities between 0 and 25 persons per square mile in a population density raster are assigned a value of 1 in the output raster and so on. An integer raster can be reclassified by either method, but a floating-point raster can only be reclassified by the second method. Reclassification serves three main purposes. First, reclassification can create a simplified raster. For example, instead of having continuous slope values, a raster can have 1 for slopes of 0 to 10 percent, 2 for 10 to 20 percent, and so on. SeconPd, reclassification can create a new raster that contains a unique category or value such as slopes of 10 to 20 P percent. Third, reclassification can create a new raster that shows the ranking of cell values in the input raster. For example, a reclassified raster can show the ranking of 1 to 5, with 1 A being least suitable and 5 being most suitable. Local Operations with Multiple Rasters: R Local operations with multiple rasters

are also referred to as compositing, overlaying, or superimposing maps. Because locOal operations can work with multiple rasters, they are the equivalent of vector-based overlay operations. A greater variety of local operations have multiple input rasters than hCave a single input raster. Besides mathematical operators that can be used on individual rasters, other measures that are based on the cell values or their U frequencies in the input rasters can also be derived and stored in the output raster. Some of these measures are, however, limited to rasters with numeric data. Summary statistics, T including maximum, minimum, range, sum, mean, median, and standard deviation, are measures that apply to rasters with numeric data. S The cell value in (d) is the mean calculated from three input rasters (a, b, and c) in a local operation. The shaded cells have no data. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV For example, above figure shows a local operation that calculates the mean from three input rasters. If a cell contains no data in one of the input rasters, the cell also carries no data in the output raster by default. Some local operations do not involve statistics or computation. A local operation called Combine assigns a unique output value to each unique combination of input values. Suppose a slope raster has three cell values (0 to 20 percent, 20 to 40 percent, and greater than 40 percent slope), and an aspect raster has four cell values (north, east, south, and west P aspects). P A R O C Each cell value in (c) represents a unique combination of cell values in (a) and (b). The combination codes and their representations are shown in (d). U The Combine operation creates an output raster with a

value for each unique combination of slope and aspect, such as 1 for greater than 40 percent slope and the south T aspect, 2 for 20 to 40 percent slope and the south aspect, and so on S Applications of Local Operations: A change detection study of land cover, for example, can use the unique combinations produced by the Combine operation to trace the change of the land cover type. The land cover databases (2001, 2006, and 2011) from the U.S. Geological Survey (USGS)) are ideal for such a change detection study. The Revised Universal Soil Loss Equation (RUSLE) uses six environmental factors in the equation: A = R K L S C P, where A is the predicted soil loss, RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV R is the rainfall–runoff erosivity factor, K is the soil erodibility factor, L is the slope length factor, S is the slope steepness factor, C is the crop management factor, and P is the support practice factor. With each factor prepared as an input raster, we can multiply the rasters in a local operation P to produce the output raster of predicted soil loss. P Neighborhood Operations: A neighborhood operation, also called a focal opAeration, involves a focal cell and a set of its surrounding cells. The surrounding cells are chosen for their distance and/or directional relationship to the focal cell. A required parameter for neighborhood operations is the type of R neighborhood. Common neighbourhoods include rectangles, circles, annuluses, and wedges. O C U T S Four common neighborhood types: rectangle (a),circle (b), annulus (c), and wedge (d). The cell marked with an x is the focal cell. A rectangle is defined by its width and height in cells, such as a 3-by-3 area

centered at the focal cell. A circle extends from the focal cell with a specified radius. An annulus or doughnut-shaped neighborhood consists of the ring area between a smaller circle and a larger RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV circle centered at the focal cell. And a wedge consists of a piece of a circle centered at the focal cell. Applications of Neighborhood Operations: An important application of neighborhood operations is data simplification. The moving average method, for instance, reduces the level of cell value fluctuation in the input raster. The method typically uses a 3-by-3 or a 5-by-5 rectangle as the neighborhood. As the neighborhood is moved from one focal cell to another, the average ofP cell values within the neighborhood is computed and assigned to the focal cell. The output raster of moving P averages represents a generalization of the original cell values. A R O C U Neighborhood operations are common in image processing. These operations are T variously called filtering, convolution, or moving window operations for spatial feature manipSulation Zonal Operations: A zonal operation works with groups of cells of same values or like features. These groups are called zones. Zones may be contiguous or noncontiguous. A contiguous zone includes cells that are spatially connected, whereas a non-contiguous zone includes separate regions of cells. A watershed raster is an example of a contiguous zone, in which cells that belong to the same watershed are spatially connected. A land use raster is an example of a non-contiguous zone, in which one type of land use may appear in different parts of the raster. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Given two rasters in a zonal operation, one input raster

and one zonal raster, a zonal operation produces an output raster, which summarize the cell values in the input raster for each zone in the zonal raster. The summary statistics and measures include area, minimum, maximum, sum, range, mean, standard deviation, median, majority, minority, and variety. NETWORK: A network is a system of linear features that has the appropriate attributes for the flow of objects. A road system is a familiar network. Other networks include railways, public transit lines, bicycle paths, and streams. A network is typically topologPy-based: lines meet at intersections, lines cannot have gaps, and lines have directions. P A link refers to a road segment defined by two end points. Also called edges or arcs, links are the basic geometric features of a network. Link impedance is the cost of traversing a A link. A simple measure of the cost is the physical length of the link. But the length may not be a reliable measure of cost, especially in cities where speed limits and traffic conditions vary significantly along different streets. R A junction refers to a street intersection. A junction is also called a node. A turn is a transition from one street segment Oto another at a junction. Turn impedance is the time it takes to complete a turn, which is significant in a congested street network. Turn impedance is directional. C U NETWORK ANALYSIS: A network with the appropriate attributes can be used for a variety of applications. T Some applications are directly accessible through GIS tools. Others require the integration of GIS and specialized software in operations research and management science. S Shortest Path Analysis: Shortest path analysis finds the path with the minimum cumulative impedance between nodes on a network. Because the link impedance can be measured in distance or time,

a shortest path may represent the shortest route or fastest route. Shortest path analysis typically begins with an impedance matrix in which a value represents the impedance of a direct link between two nodes on a network and an ∞ (infinity) means no direct connection. The problem is to find the shortest distances (least cost) from a node to all other nodes. A variety of algorithms can be used to solve the problem; among them, the most commonly used algorithm is the Dijkstra algorithm. Dijkstra’s Algorithm: RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV The idea of the algorithm is very simple. 1.It maintains a list of unvisited vertices. 2.It chooses a vertex (the source) and assigns a maximum possible cost (i.e. infinity) to every other vertex. 3.The cost of the source remains zero as it actually takes nothing to reach from the source vertex to itself. 4.In every subsequent step of the algorithm it tries to improve(minimize) the cost for P each vertex. Here the cost can be distance, money or time taken to reach that vertex from the source vertex. The minimization of cost is a multi-step process. P a. For each unvisited neighbor (vertex 2, vertex 3, vertex 4) of the current vertex A (vertex 1) calculate the new cost from the vertex (vertex 1). b. For e.g. the new cost of vertex 2 is calculated as the minimum of the two ( (existing cost of vertex 2) or R(sum of cost of vertex 1 + the cost of edge from vertex 1 to vertex 2) ) O 5. When all the neighbors of the current node are considered, it marks the current node as visited and is removed from the unvisited list. C 6. Select a vertex from the

list of unvisited nodes (which has the smallest cost) and repeat step 4. U 7. At the end there will be no possibilities to improve it further and then the algorithm ends T Example: S 1 2 RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV 3 4 P P A 5 6 R O C 7 U Traveling Salesman Problem: The Ttraveling salesman problem is a routing problem, which stipulates that the salesman must visit each of the select stops only once, and the salesman may start from any S stop but must return to the original stop. The objective is to determine which route, or tour, the salesman can take to minimize the total impedance value. A common solution to the travelling salesman problem uses a heuristic method. Algorithm: Let us consider a graph G = (V, E), where V is a set of cities and E is a set of weighted edges. An edge e(u, v) represents that vertices u and v are connected. Distance between vertex u and v is d(u, v), which should be non-negative. 1. Select the source node. 2. Mark the current node as selected and compute the distance to all its adjacent nodes. 3. Choose the adjacent node with minimum distance. 4. Repeat the steps 2 and 3 till all the nodes as marked as selected. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Source node=1 The Hamilton path P Vehicle Routing Problem: The vehicle routing problem is an extension of the travePling salesman problem. Given a fleet of vehicles and customers, the main objective of the vehicle routing problem is to A schedule vehicle routes and visits to customers in such a way that the total travel time

is minimized. Additional constraints such as time windows, vehicle capacity, and dynamic conditions (e.g., traffic congestion) may also exist. Because vehicle routing involves complex R modeling applications, it requires the integration of GIS and special routing software in operations research and management science. O Closest Facility: C Closest facility is a network analysis that finds the closest facility among candidate facilities to any locaUtion on a network. The analysis first computes the shortest paths from the select location to all candidate facilities, and then chooses the closest facility among the candidates. TA couple of options may be applied to the closest facility problem. First, rather than getting a single facility, the user may ask for a number of closest facilities. Second, the S user may specify a search radius in distance or travel time, thus limiting the candidate facilities. Allocation: Allocation is the study of the spatial distribution of resources through a network. Resources in allocation studies often refer to public facilities, such as fire stations, schools, hospitals, and even open spaces (in case of earthquakes). Because the distribution of the resources defines the extent of the service area, the main objective of spatial allocation analysis is to measure the efficiency of these resources. RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV DIGITAL ELEVATION MODEL: DEMs are a primary data source for terrain mapping and analysis. A traditional method for producing DEMs is to use a stereoplotter and stereo pairs of aerial photographs (i.e., pairs of aerial photographs of the same area taken from slightly different positions to produce the 3-D effect). The stereoplotter creates a 3-D model, allowing the operator to compile elevation data. Although this method can produce highly accurate DEM data, it requires experienced operators and is time-consuming. Another traditional

method is to interpolate a DEM from the contour lines of a topographic map. P Several new techniques for DEM generation have been developed in recent years. The P main techniques are using optical sensors, interferometric synthetic aperture radar (InSAR), and light detection and ranging (LiDAR). A Optical Sensors: To make DEMs, two or more opticRal satellite images of the same area taken from different directions are needed. These stereo images should be taken within a short time interval so that their spectral signatOures do not differ significantly. Two optical sensors that readily meet the requirement are Terra ASTER and SPOT 5. ASTER provides a nadir view and a backward view withiCn a minute, and the HRS (High Resolution Sensor) carried on SPOT 5 provides a forward view and a backward view along its orbit. ASTER DEMs have a U spatial resolution of 30 meters. Airbus Defence and Space distributes SPOT 5 DEMs with a spatial resolution of 20 meters. DEMs can also be generated from very high resolution T satellite images such as World-View images as long as stereo pairs are available S InSAR: InSAR uses two or more SAR images to generate elevations of the reflective surface, which may be vegetation, man-made features, or bare ground. SRTM (Shuttle Radar Topography Mission) DEMs, for example, are derived from SAR data collected by two radar antennas placed on the Space Shuttle in 2000. SRTM DEMs cover over 80 percent of the landmass of the Earth between 60° N and 56° S. LiDAR: The basic components of a LiDAR system include a laser scanner mounted in an aircraft, GPS, and an Inertial Measurement Unit (IMU). The laser scanner has a pulse generator, which emits rapid laser pulses (0.8 — 1.6 μm wavelength) over an area of interest, and a RMKCET –

CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV receiver, which gets scattered and reflected pulses from targets. Using the time lapse of the pulse, the distance (range) between the scanner and the target can be calculated. At the same time, the location and orientation of the aircraft are measured by the GPS and IMU, respectively. The target location in a three dimensional space can therefore be determined by using the information obtained by the LiDAR system. A major application of LiDAR technology is the creation of high resolution DEMs, with a spatial resolution of 0.5 to 2 meters. P Application of Digital Elevation Model: P  DEMs have many applications in remote sensing and mapping, such as topographic mapping (contours), thematic mapping, orthoimage generation and image analysis, A map revision, and so on.  DEMs are important in providing valuable geological information that can be used as a guide in defining the geology of aR given area. Geological structures and rock unit boundaries showing a strong correlation with relief can be mapped with detailed O topographic analysis.  DEMs are used to extract information relevant to ground water studies such as C potential areas or groundwater recharge or contamination. U 3D DATA COLLECTION AND UTILIZATION: 3D GIS brings enhanced depth into data collection and analysis by incorporating a z- T value into mapping. Most commonly, that means including elevation data, but users have many options for adding layers of information. For instance, a map might include a S dimension based on the concentrations of certain chemicals and minerals or which parcels of land are best suited for development. Working with three dimensions, GIS professionals can often apply their findings to address real-world issues with greater accuracy. While 3D models are more difficult to create and

maintain than 2D ones, there are many 3D GIS applications where this technology is greatly beneficial. These four examples demonstrate how an investment in 3D GIS modeling can generate added value: City Planning: RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV Cities have a way of growing to encompass previously under- or undeveloped areas in a process often called urbanization or urban sprawl. There are many reasons behind urban sprawl, including a desire to build improved infrastructure, affordable land or tax rates, or overcrowding inside the city. Urban sprawl can have a major impact on people who decide to leave the city as well as those who remain. For example, as residents move farther away from the city center, infrastructure such as roads or public transportation systems must accommodate their commutes, and traffic can lead to higher rates of air pollution. To minimize the negative impacts of urban sprawl and increased developmPent, it’s important for city planners to carefully determine the best way to grow urban areas. P 3D GIS software can help city planners visualize what their proposed changes will look like and predict the outcomes for current residents and future generations. The wide A range of integrated information allowed architects, planning engineers and others to collaborate effectively. As the district develops further, the 3D model will help future planners with energy and environmental modReling and guide public participation initiatives. O Building Information Modeling: Building information modeling (BIM) is a technology that generates digital representations of facilities Cand relevant processes. BIM has given facilities managers the ability to closely review structures, beginning with the construction planning phase. Used in U conjunction with 3D GIS data, BIM can help create robust building management plans and allow for more detailed analysis. For example, before

breaking ground on a construction T project, stakeholders can review findings from GIS and BIM to draw conclusions about environmental impact, sustainability, disaster readiness and how to optimize the use of assets S and space. BIM and 3D GIS can also come together to support the preservation and restoration of historical buildings. Coastal Modeling and Analysis: A nation’s coastline is a crucial gateway for imports and exports, and about 40 percent of the world’s population lives within 60 miles of a coast. But these areas also pose numerous challenges for development. Its critical for planners to understand the factors that affect construction and maintenance for shipping ports, fisheries, mineral mining operations and wilderness preservation areas. Responsible coastal development must be informed by underwater topography, local vegetation and predictions for the long-term environmental impact. Resource planning systems that draw on GIS can provide insights into the economic, RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM OCE552 – GEOGRAPHIC INFORMATION SYSTEM UNIT- IV environmental and cultural results of activities along the coast. The right data makes all the difference in sustainably performing operations like construction or excavation. Wind Farm Assessment: Planning a wind farm requires a detailed analysis of an environment and the potential effects of the structures. By using 3D GIS modeling, planners and other stakeholders can get a better idea of the impact from wind farm development on wildlife and people. For example, when assessing possible wind farm locations in two dimensions, a Pbird’s migratory path might make a location seem inaccessible. However, reviewing that same space using 3D GIS P data, may reveal that the elevation of birds’ flight paths and the height of the wind farm are compatible. A ***** R O C U T S RMKCET – CSE DEPT DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM UNIT V APPLICATIONS 9

GIS Applicant - Natural Resource Management - Engineering - Navigation - Vehicle tracking and fleet management - Marketing and Business applications - Case studies. 5.1GIS APPLICANT GIS is convergence of technological fields and traditional disciplines. GIS has been called an "enabling technology" because of the potential it offers for the wide variePty of disciplines dealing with spatial data. Many related fields of study provide techniques which make up GIS. These related fields emphasise data collections while GIS brings them together by emphasising P integration, modelling and analysis. Thus GIS often claims to be the science of spatial information. Fig. 17.1 shows the technical and conceptual development of GIS.. The list of contributing disciplines can be classified according to (1A) Heritage (2) Data Collection (3) Data analysis (4) Data Reporting . An important distinction between GIS applications is w hether the geographic phenomena studied are man-made or natural. Clearly, setting up Ra cadastral information system, or using GIS for urban planning purposes involves a study of man-made things mostly: the parcels, roads, sidewalks, and at larger scale, suburbs and transportation routes are all man-made, those entities often have clear-cut boundaries. OnO the other hand, geomorphologists, ecologists and soil scientists often have natural phenomena as their study objects. They may be looking at rock formations, plate tectonics, distribution of natural vegetation or soil units. Often, these entities do not have clear-cut boundariesC, and there exist transition zones where one vegetation type, for instance, is gradually replaced by another. (de et al, 2001). U The applications of GIS include mapping locations, quantities and densities, finding distances and mapping and monitoring change. Function of an Information system is to improve one’s ability to make decisions. An Information system is a chain of operations starting from planning T the observation and collection of data, to

store and analysis of the data, to the use of the derived information in some decision making process. A GIS is an information system that is designed to work with data referenced to spatial or geographic coordinates. GIS is both a database system S with specific capabilities for spatially referenced data, as well as a set of operation for working with data. There are three basic types of GIS applications which might also represent stages of development of a single GIS applications. 5.2 NATURAL RESOURCE MANAGEMENT The major application of GIS in natural resource management is in confronting with environmental issues like a flood, landslide, soil erosions, drought, earthquake etc. GIS in natural resource management also address the current problems of climate change, habitat loss, population growth, pollution etc. The solution to these problems is the application of GIS in natural resource management. Yes, introduction to GIS has solved many problems related to the natural environment. GIS is a powerful tool that is used in the management of natural resources. Some applications of GIS in major fields are discussed below: 159 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM • Hazard and risk assessment GIS in natural resource management is used in the reduction of a natural hazard such as flood, landslide, soil erosion, forest fires, earthquake, drought etc. One cannot totally stop these natural disasters but can minimize these warnings by early planning, preparation, and strategies. GIS in natural resource management is being used in analyzing, organizing, managing and monitoring the natural hazards. GIS in natural resource management provides a spatial data of the disasters that have taken place before or might to occur so that early risk can be prevented. It is indicated through GIS-based map. P P A R O Risk Assessment C • Change detection GIS in natural resourUce management

provides information about land area change between time periods. The land change documents detected through satellite imagery or aerial photographs. It is a useful application in land change, deforestation assessment, urbanization, habitat fragmentationT etc. The information obtained from GIS in natural resource management help to study the specific area and monitoring can be done in and around the area. It is a way of studying the variations taking place in landscape and managing the environment. S 160 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM P P A R O Change detection in land use C • Natural resource inventory Natural resource inventory is a statistical survey of the condition of natural resources. It provides relevant information about the environment condition and policy including conservation program U that is obtained through GIS in natural resource management. The information through maps in GIS provides the information of location and current resources. T S Forest Inventory • Environmental Monitoring GIS in natural resource management provides a graphical data that helps in monitoring the environment. It determines the qualitative and quantitative data about the environment issues 161 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM such as pollution, land degradation, soil erosions etc. GIS in natural resource management detects these problems and predicts the future hazards. Thus, GIS in natural resource management monitors all these environment problems. GIS application in Natural Resource Management: • GIS helps in the management of land providing resourceful data in doing construction works or any agricultural works. It selects a suitable site before any change is done. • GIS in natural resource management is conserving wide range of biodiversity by the pre information obtained through it. Many biological habitats are protected and further planning for the protection of flora and fauna is promoted. P • GIS in natural resource management provides hydrological data for the analysis

of watershed management and Watershed analysis. • GIS in water resource management is now extended in the use oPf mineral exploration in various developed countries like USA, Canada and Australia. Further applications are briefly pointed as below: A • Facility management • Topographic analysis • Network analysis R • Transportation modeling • Engineering design • Demographic analysis O • Geo process modeling Therefore, GIS is a suitable teCchnology for the understanding of natural resource management. It is an effective technique to learn the factors affecting environment including its result and execution. The geo spatial data taken through this GIS meet the sustainable use of natural U resources. Thus, GIS in natural resource management guides in managing the resources properly and wisely in present and future generation. In addition, GIS in natural resource management helps in management of natural resources effectively and efficiently. T 5.3 ENGINEERING S An advanced information system like GIS plays a vital role and serves as a complete platform in every phase of infrastructure life cycle. Advancement and availability of technology has set new marks for the professionals in the infrastructure development areas. Now more and more professionals are seeking help of these technologically smart and improved information systems like GIS for infrastructure development. Each and every phase of infrastructure life-cycle is greatly affected and enhanced by the enrollment of GIS. • Planning: In planning its major contribution is to give us with an organized set of data which can help professionals to combat complex scenarios relating to the selection of site, environmental impact, study of ecosystem, managing risk regarding the use of natural resources, sustainability issues, managing traffic congestion, routing of roads and pipelines etc. 162 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM • Data Collection: Precise and accurate data is the core driving factor of any successful project.

GIS is equipped with almost all those tools and functions that enables user to have access to the required data within a reasonable time. • Analysis: Analysis is one of the major and most influential phases of infrastructure life cycle. Analysis guides us about the validity or correctness of design or we can say that analysis is a method which supports our design. Some of the analyses that can be performed by GIS are: • Water distribution analysis • Traffic management analysis P • Soil analysis • Site feasibility analysis P • Environment impact analysis • Volume or Area analysis of catchment • River or canals pattern analysis A • Temperature and humidity analysis Construction: It is the stage when all layout plans and paper work design come into existence in the real world. The GIS helps the professionals to understand the site R conditions that affect the schedule baseline and cost baseline. To keep the construction within budget and schedule GIS guides us about how to utilize our resources on site efficiency by: O • Timely usage of construction equipment. • Working Hours C • Effects of seasonal fluctuations. • Optimizing routes for dumpers and concrete trucks • Earth fill U ing and cutting • Calculation of volumes and areas of constructed phase thereby helping in Estimation and Valuation. OperatTions: Operations are controlled by modeling of site data and compared by the baselines prepared in planning phase. Modeling of site may be in the form of raster images or CAD drawings. These can help us to keep track of timely operations of activities. S GIS can help to make a record of work that has been completed and can give us visualization in the form of thematic maps which will guide us about rate of operations, completed operations and

pending operations. In short we can say that GIS will prove to be the foundation of next generation civil engineering. 5.4 NAVIGATION (ROUTING AND SCHEDULING) Web-based navigation maps encourage safe navigation in waterway. Ferry paths and shipping routes are identified for the better routing. ArcGIS supports safe navigation system and provides accurate topographic and hydrographic data. Recently DNR, s Coastal Resources Division began 163 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM the task of locating, documenting, and cataloging these no historic wrecks with GIS. This division is providing public information that make citizens awareness of these vessel locations through web map. The web map will be regularly updated to keep the boating public informed of these coastal hazards to minimize risk of collision and injury. 5.5 VEHICLE TRACKING AND FLEET MANAGEMENT The core of a Fleet Management Tracking system is a GNSS tracking system used in conjunction with data transmission by means of the selected communications system, for instance GSM or GPRS. P This combination of GNSS technology with GSM/GPRS wireless coverage, can keep track on the position of all the resources, such as vehicles, personnel, assets, as well as incidents. This information is sent to a server and can be visualized using a GPeographic Information System (GIS), where the location, stops, idling and distance covered by each item can be monitored. Many systems keep the tracking data stored locally or centrally, which can be retrieved for A further analysis. The GNSS unit is essential to identify the position of the vehicle. The tracking systems usually use one of the following architectures, which always in clude a GNSS receiver: R • Passive Tracking: The tracking system stores the vehicles location, through a GNSS receiver, and other data, such as vehicle condition or container status. This data is stored and O can be collected

and analyzed at the end of the trip. • Active Tracking: The tracking device obtains the vehicle location, through the GNSS C receiver, and sends it through a wireless communication system to a control center on regular intervals or if certain condition are met. U • Real-time, cellular network: The vehicle's locations and speed are transmitted periodically over a GSM cellular network. The controller accesses to the information by logging on to the vendor's website, which requires a monthly fee, or by receiving the data directly on a cell T phone, which requires a cell phone account. The positions of trucks or goods are updated every few minutes, according with the system specification. S • Real-time, satellite: The vehicle's data is transmitted through satellite to the vendor and the controller accesses the data by logging on to the vendor's website. This method also requires a monthly subscription fee.[5] A fleet management tracking is constituted by the following components: • On Board Unit (OBU), which includes the GNSS receiver and other types of sensors to collect the status of the vehicle and the cargo. This device will also have the ability to connect to a central tracking server. The vehicle's information can include latitude, longitude, altitude, computed odometer, door open or close, fuel amount, tire pressure, turnoff ignition, turn on headlight, engine temperature, as well as cargo information and other vehicle's sensors. 164 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM • Driver Console, most systems include a driver console where the driver can register shift starts/end, route used, stops, pickups, dropoffs and other labor and business related information that cannot be acquired automatically. This console can be also used to provide messaging or warnings to the drivers. Warnings can be issued if the adequate procedures or schedule are not being followed. • Central tracking

server, which have the capability to receive, store and publish the tracking data to an user interface, which usually encompasses a Geographic Information System. Application Characterization P The main benefits of Fleet Management and Vehicle Tracking Applications are: P • Improved operational efficiency of the vehicle fleet - Fleet Management provides businesses with operational data of the fleet allowing the optimization and planning of the A resources, improving response times, increasing the number of services and using the most suitable routes. • Improved customer care - Knowing were each v ehicle of the fleet is at a given time allows companies to be able to provide to its custRomers accurate information about the location and expected arrival time of vehicles and/or goods transported in the vehicles. • Reduction of theft risk - In case of theft, the vehicle is easily locatable which makes it possible to act immediately in ordOer to recover it. • Facilitated Fleet Maintenance - Usually fleet management systems provide tools to plan the vehicle maintenance based on the distances run providing alarms to inspections and maintenance activities. C • Enforcement of Transport Regulations - The transport of persons or goods normally follow specific regulations such as forbidden areas (e.g. some areas are not allowed for U vehicles transporting dangerous goods), velocity limits, labor regulations (e.g. maximum number of consecutive hours a driver can work). Fleet management systems allow companies to guarantee that these regulations are being followed by their drivers. T Some of the sectors that use fleet management are: S • Public Services Fleets - Fleets providing public services (e.g. waste collection, road maintenance, taxi fleets, etc) use GNSS for the optimization of routes, planning of services and determine closest responder. • Emergency and Assistance Fleets - Emergency and Assistance fleets use GNSS to determine

which is the vehicle most adequate to respond to a assistance request. • Car Rental Companies - Car rental companies use GNSS to determine closest available vehicle for a client, to monitor mileage or area limits on rented vehicles and as anti-theft system. • Goods Transportation and Distribution - Freight transportation companies use GNSS to monitor the goods transportation, providing information to customers about their cargo and determine closest vehicle for unscheduled pickups. • Sales Force Management - Companies with a mobile sales force can use GNSS to determine the closest representative in case of unscheduled visits and to monitor their representatives activity, mileage and work hours. 165 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM • Hazardous Goods or Valuables Transportation - Hazardous goods or valuables transportation companies are using GNSS to monitor in realtime the transported goods, supporting alarms when the vehicle deviates from the scheduled route or violates transportation regulations. Fleet management systems for these companies normally support panic button functionalities that will send the position of the vehicle to the central tracking server in case of emergency or theft. • Public Transportation - Public transportation operators are using GNSS to track the vehicle fleet, to eventually reroute vehicles if needed and to provide information to the user. The use of GNSS for Fleet Management and Vehicle Tracking in certain sectors has been driven P by transport regulations and policies. A specific example of the use of such systems is for Livestock transportation in Europe which is detailed in the following section. P Tracking of Livestock Transportation The application of satellite positioning for livestock traceability is becoming a general objective A to support livestock transportation policies. Regulation in Europe, requires an appropriate navigation system allowing for recording and providing information equivalent to those required in the journey log and information concerning

open ing/closing of the loading doors. It also requires a temperature monitoring and recoRrding system which alerts the driver when the temperature in the animal compartment reaches the maximum of 30°C or the minimum of 5°C. In livestock transportation, GNSS will permit to: O • Localize and continuously track and trace the vehicles transporting livestock in order to increase the efficiency of all activities related with livestock transportation. C • Generate reports about sensors information such as temperature, loading doors information, warning signals, etc. in order to improve the animal's welfare. • Optimal route caUlculation to specify the most suitable roads and hence, to ensure a fast and safe delivery of the cargo. • Geofencing and alarming. • RecordingT of data for statistical and enforcement/governmental use. Application Examples S The fleet management devices can can range from more simple devices without any interface with the user or to devices that have graphical human-machine interfaces and some might have interfaces with the vehicle's on-board diagnostics or other specific vehicle systems such as temperature sensors, door opening sensors, etc. Although usually these systems are attached permanently to the vehicle it is possible (although not usual) to use GNSS cell phones running specific applications for fleet management. The devices normally used for fleet management are usually called Vehicle Trackers and are described in more detail here. These systems can be sold as a product where the on-board device is sold to the costumer and the management of the fleet can be done by an application or server bundled with it. The complexity of the management application can vary from a simple application that shows the position of the vehicles and can generate reports based on the data received from the on-board devices to realtime servers that can be customized supporting realtime alarms and

that can provide complex services such routing, planning and customized reporting. Alternatively some providers offer 166 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM these systems as a service where the equipment can be rented and the centralized services are provided as a service. In some cases even communications costs are handled by the provider and a monthly fee per vehicle monitored is charged to the costumer. 5.6 MARKETING AND BUSINESS APPLICATIONS 1. Banking: Being market driven banks need to provide customer centric services around planning of resources and marketing. GIS plays an important role providing planning, organizing and decision making. P 2. Assets Management: GIS helps organizations to locate and store information about their assets. Operations and maintenance staff can also deploy their enterprise and mobile workforce. P 3. Dairy Industry: Geographic Information Systems are used in the distribution of products, production rate, location of shops and their selling rate. These can also be monitored by using a GIS system. A 4. Tourism: Tourists can get all the information they need on a click, measuring distance, finding hotels, restaurants and even navigate to their respective links. This Information plays a vital role to tourists in planning their travel from one place to another. R 5. Business: GIS is used for managing business information based on its location. GIS can keep track of where customers are located, site business, target marketing campaigns, and optimize sales territories and model retail spending patterns. O 6. Market Share: Examining branch locations, competitor locations and demographic characteristics to identify areas worthy of expansion or determine market share in Maptitude. 7. ATM Machine: Filling in market and service gaps by understanding where customers, C facilities, and competitors are with address locating, database management and query tools. 8. World Bank Economic Statistics: Slicing and dicing raw financial data from the

World U Bank. 9. Merger and Acquisitions: Profiling and finding opportunities to gain and build where customers are with market profiling T 10. Supply and Demand: Identifying under-served areas and analyzing your competitor's market.S 11. Community Reinvestment Act (CRA): Fulfilling the obligations to loan in areas with particular attention to low- and moderate-income households – using GIS to understand spatial demographics. 12. Mobile Banking: Capturing locations where existing mobile transaction occur and assisting in mobile security infrastructure. 13. Internet of Things: Improving efficiency, accuracy and economic benefit through a network of physical objects such as devices, vehicles, buildings and other items—embedded with electronics, software, sensors, and network connectivity that enables these objects to collect and exchange information with one another. 14. Market Share Analysis: Optimizing the locations of facilities so the allocated demand is maximized in the presence of competitors using tools like location-allocation in ArcGIS. 167 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM 15. Integrated Freight Network Model: Integrating highly detailed information about shipping costs, transfer costs, traffic volumes and network interconnectivity properties in a GIS-based platform. (Integrated Freight Network Model) 5.7 CASE STUDIES 1.Agriculture Background P Identification, description and mapping of Rangeland sites to a scale of 1:250,000; estimation of the present and potential grazing productivity and load; and presentation of recommendations for P sustainable management for each site. Solution RMSI created a comprehensive Remote Sensing and GAIS-based database using satellite data, thematic maps, floral species inventory data and biomass estimation complemented with field expertise. The study provided ready-to-use maps for managers and decision/ policy makers to ensure Sustained and Secured Rangelands. The databa se also provided qualitative & quantitative information related to the benefits derived fromR Rangelands in terms of ecosystem services such as available biomass for livestock and other uses by humans. ClientBenefit O The comprehensive Remote Sensing and

GIS database with multiple layers of information served as a key reference for evaluation, management and monitoring of Rangelands in the arid regions of the Saudi Arabia. This in particular reflects the Kingdom’s commitment towards C Climate Change resilience by conserving Rangelands and its vegetation. 2.Forestry Background U Realizing the need to increase the adaptive capacity of farming communities, the World Bank commissioned RMSI to develop an application suite of a web and a mobile-phone application to disseminate location-specific climate/ weather information, and related agro-advisories, which T are understandable to the farmers on real-time basis. The agro-weather tool disseminates vital weather-forecast linked agro-advisories through SMS, IVRS, mobile app, and website for farmersS to better plan and manages weather risks, and maximizes productivity. Solution RMSI experts developed web and mobile phone (i.e., IVRS, SMS, android app) based agro- weather tool to disseminate weather forecast information and best-bet agronomic management practices for the farmers in Ethiopia and Kenya. The tool was developed for the main cultivated crops in Ada’a district of Ethiopia (chickpea, lentil, teff, and wheat) and in Embu district of Kenya (bean, maize, sorghum, tea, and coffee) on a pilot basis. ClientBenefit The key benefit is the availability of location-specific agro-advisories to farmers to minimize crop losses, and practice climate-smart agriculture. 168 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM CONTENT BEYOND SYLLABI GIS in the Cloud using ArcGIS Online: Esri cloud ecosystem allows you to access, create, edit, analyze and share maps, apps, and geospatial data from anywhere in the world. While traditional GIS is installed on your desktop or server, Cloud GIS makes use of the flexibility of the cloud environment for data capture, visualization, analysis and sharing. P Cloud GIS The cloud computing technology has revolutionized the way one works. Although GIS has been P a late adopter of the cloud

technology, the many advantages are compelling organizations to shift their geospatial functions to the cloud. Cloud-based toolsA are accessed for web-based geographic information system. Data generated as maps are helping analyze and optimize operations in real- time. Apps in the cloud are helping manage isolated silos of GIS workflows and geodatabases. R Thus, Cloud GIS could be defined as a next generation on-demand GIS technology that uses a virtualized platform or infrastructure in a scalable elastic environment. O How does Cloud GIS work? The cloud computing environment offers three base service models – Software-as-a-Service C (SaaS); Platform-as-a-Service (PaaS); and Infrastructure-as-a-Service (IaaS). U T S 169 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM Cloud GIS Service Models In the geospatial environment, the Cloud SaaS supports three other service models • GIS-as-a-Service (GaaS), • Applications-as-a-Service (AaaS) • Imagery-as-a-Service (IaaS), where ready-to-use GIS datasets are available as Data-as-a- Service (DaaS) These are accessed as private, public, hybrid or community cloud serviPces, depending upon the organization’s need for security, collaboration and ownership. P A R O C U T S Cloud GIS Deployment Models Key Benefits of GIS in the Cloud 170 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM P P Key Benefits of GIS in the CAloud Other Benefits of Cloud GIS • On demand service of online maps, geospatial data, imagery, computing or analysis R • Large volumes of data handling, app management and geospatial analysis possible • Supports viewing, creating, monitoring, managing, analyzing and sharing maps and data O with other users • Facilitates inputs, validation and collaboration by a global mobile workforce in real time C • As optimizing with spatio temporal principles is possible, it provides effective geospatial validations anUd analysis • Managed services prevent data and work loss from frequent outages, minimizing financial risks, while increasing efficiency T • Competitive advantage – shorter time

to share and publish maps, with always on always Savailable data / maps; and effective ROI • Choice of various deployment, service and business models to best suit organization goals • Supports offerings of client-rich GIS software solutions as a software plus service model – geocoding, mapping, routing, and more Applications • Earth observation data • Citizen and social science • Road infrastructure projects • Mobile data collection and integration 171 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM • Traffic management • E-commerce and geo-targeted advertising • Geo-referenced Weather Service • Crime analysis • Web mapping • Research • Public safety and emergency response P Case Studies P Education and Research in the GIS Cloud, using ArcGIS Online and Mango Map This application was constructed using the map services and application templates on ArcGIS A Online. R O C U T S 172 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM P P A R O C U T S Relationship between rates in obesity, diabetes, and percentage of people on restricted sugar diet (US). Another user-contributed initiative makes use of the Mango Map interactive web map platform. 173 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM P P A R Deforestation in Cambodia 1976 – 2006 O Transport Departments making use of the GIS Cloud – Maryland, Idaho, Utah The Maryland Department of Transportation has deployed a four level cloud-based model. The C first is a hybrid application (MUTTS) which coordinates and tracks responses of construction work and excavations. The second model uses a hybrid cloud configuration of interactive mobile U application for travelling truck drivers, highway motorists and cyclists. The third focuses on integration with the interagency mapping and GIS data portal MD iMap. The fourth deployment T is a private cloud integrating the enterprise GIS of MDTA for access of staff members only. The whole system seamlessly blends

the functionality of Esri, with data and applications stored S within the MDOT’s firewall. Security and Crime management in the Cloud The US Department of Homeland Security uses ArcGIS cloud products to access and share critical data for protection of US citizens – in aviation, border security, emergency response, cybersecurity, and chemical facility inspection. The Ogden Police Department operates a real-time crime center for a 24 hour support using ArcGIS cloud services. Cloud GIS Products and Vendors ArcGIS Business Analyst Online – on-demand reports and maps for informed decision. 174 DOWNLOADED FROM DOWNLOADED FROM ArcGIS Online. –creation of interactive web maps and apps, shared with anyone, on any device. Explorer for ArcGIS – access, author, share maps from any device. ArcGIS Server on Amazon EC2 – deploy ArcGIS Server and use enterprise geodatabases on Amazon EC2. Vendors – GIS Cloud, Mango Map, MapBox, Map2Net, MapInfo Stratus, ThunderMaps, GIS Direct, Spatial Vision, Interroute, Aerometric, and more. P P A R O C U T S 175 DOWNLOADED FROM

lOMoARcPSD|58042736 Unit V Import/Export Process in GIS The import/export process in GIS involves transferring geospatial data between different formats or systems. This process is critical for enabling data sharing, integration, and interoperability across various GIS software, platforms, and tools. Steps in the Import/Export Process 1. Data Preparation Ensure the dataset is complete, accurate, and properly o structured before importing or exporting. Check for attributes like coordinate reference systems o (CRS), metadata, and format compatibility. 2. Exporting Data Select the required layers, features, or attributes for o export. Choose an appropriate file format based on the intended o application or target system. Example formats: Shapefile (SHP), GeoJSON, KML,  CSV, GeoTIFF. Save or export the data using GIS software tools. o 3. Importing Data Load the exported file into the target GIS platform. o Verify the CRS to ensure proper georeferencing. o Perform data validation to check for errors, missing o values, or mismatches lOMoARcPSD|58042736 Optionally, reformat or convert the data if needed. o 4. Data Integration Merge imported data with existing datasets for analysis, o mapping, or decision-making. Adjust symbology, attribute fields, or layer properties to o align with project requirements. Importance of the Import/Export Process in Data Interoperability 1. Facilitates Data Sharing Allows organizations to exchange geospatial information o efficiently, even if they use different GIS software. Example: Exporting data from ArcGIS as GeoJSON for use o in a web-based mapping platform. 2. Enables Cross-Platform Compatibility Converts proprietary formats into open standards, o ensuring data can be used in diverse tools. Example: Exporting a KML file for visualization in Google o Earth. 3. Enhances Collaboration Encourages multi-agency collaboration by providing a o common means to share and integrate data. Example: Government agencies sharing flood risk maps in o a standardized format like Shapefile. 4.

Supports Multi-Format Workflows Enables integration of data from various sources, such as o CAD files, satellite imagery, and tabular data. Example: Importing CSV data with coordinates into a GIS o to create spatial features. 5. Streamlines Data Interoperability Ensures smooth transition between software systems, o minimizing redundancy and technical barriers. Example: Converting DXF (CAD format) files into GIS- o friendly layers for urban planning. Common Challenges in Import/Export CRS Mismatch: Improper alignment of spatial data due to  differing coordinate systems. Data Loss: Loss of attributes or symbology during format  conversion. Format Limitations: Some formats may not support complex  geometries or metadata. Differences Between Raster and Vector Data Models in GIS Raster and vector are the two primary data models used to represent spatial data in GIS. Each has unique characteristics, advantages, and ideal use cases. Aspect Raster Data Model Vector Data Model Represents data using Represents data as a grid Representation points, lines, and of cells or pixels. polygons. Aspect Raster Data Model Vector Data Model Based on a matrix of rows Based on geometric Structure and columns. shapes and coordinates. Continuous data (e.g., Discrete data (e.g., roads, Data Type elevation, temperature). land parcels). Each cell has a single Objects can have Attributes value (e.g., color, multiple attributes (e.g., intensity). names, types). Requires large storage Storage More storage-efficient space for high-resolution Efficiency for vector geometries. data. Resolution-dependent; High precision; maintains Scalability lower quality when quality regardless of zoomed in. scale. Suitable for continuous Suitable for discrete Analysis analysis (e.g., slope, analysis (e.g., network density). analysis). Examples: GeoTIFF, JPEG, Examples: Shapefile File Formats PNG. (SHP), GeoJSON, KML. Examples of Use Cases When to Use Raster Data 1. Environmental Analysis Example: Mapping temperature variations or analyzing o

soil moisture using satellite imagery. 2. Elevation Modeling Example: Digital Elevation Models (DEMs) for terrain o analysis and hydrology studies. 3. Land Cover Mapping Example: Classifying vegetation, water bodies, and urban o areas from aerial photographs. When to Use Vector Data 1. Infrastructure and Urban Planning Example: Mapping roads, buildings, and zoning areas as o discrete polygons or lines. 2. Cadastral Mapping Example: Defining property boundaries using polygons o with precise coordinates. 3. Network Analysis Example: Finding the shortest path between locations o using road networks represented as lines. Advantages of Each Model Raster Advantages Easier to perform spatial analyses like overlay and proximity.  Handles continuous data effectively.  Compatible with remote sensing and imagery data.  Vector Advantages Higher accuracy for representing discrete features.  Efficient for attribute-rich data management.  Maintains geometric integrity at all scales. Steps Involved in Raster to Vector Conversion Raster-to-vector conversion is the process of transforming raster data (grid-based) into vector data (points, lines, and polygons). This is often done to improve data precision, facilitate analysis, or integrate raster data with vector-based GIS workflows. 1. Pre-Processing of Raster Data Ensure Data Quality: Clean the raster data to remove noise and  inconsistencies. Filtering: Apply smoothing or edge-detection filters to highlight  boundaries or features for vectorization. 2. Thresholding and Feature Extraction Binary Conversion: For single-class raster data, define  thresholds to convert continuous pixel values into binary (e.g., distinguishing water from land). Multi-Class Conversion: For multi-category rasters, assign  different classes based on pixel values (e.g., forest, urban, water). 3. Edge Detection Identify and delineate feature boundaries using algorithms like  Sobel or Canny edge detection. This step is crucial for identifying shapes and edges within the raster image. 4.

Vectorization Convert detected boundaries, features, or regions into vector  geometries: Point Vectorization: Create points for specific raster cells o of interest. Line Vectorization: Trace linear features (e.g., roads, o rivers). Polygon Vectorization: Outline closed shapes to form o polygons (e.g., land parcels). This is often done using tools in GIS software like ArcGIS, QGIS,  or GRASS GIS. 5. Post-Processing of Vector Data Simplification: Remove unnecessary vertices to reduce  complexity without losing essential details. Smoothing: Adjust jagged boundaries for better accuracy and  aesthetics. 6. Attribute Assignment Attach attributes to the vectorized features, either manually or  using the original raster data. Common Challenges in Raster-to-Vector Conversion 1. Loss of Detail Conversion can result in a loss of fine details or o oversimplification of features, especially in low-resolution raster data. 2. Handling Complex Boundaries Irregular or noisy boundaries can make vectorization o difficult, leading to inaccuracies in the resulting geometries. 3. Topological Errors Issues like overlapping polygons or unconnected line o features can arise and require manual correction. 4. High Computational Cost Processing large or high-resolution rasters can be o computationally intensive and time-consuming. 5. Data Incompatibility Differences in coordinate reference systems (CRS) o between raster and vector datasets may lead to alignment issues. Importance of Data Output in GIS Data output in GIS refers to the presentation of spatial data in a form that can be effectively communicated, understood, and used for decision-making. This typically includes maps, charts, tables, and digital reports Significance of Data Output 1. Communication of Spatial Information Maps and other outputs convey complex spatial patterns o and relationships in an easily interpretable format. Example: A flood risk map visually communicates o vulnerable areas to decision-makers and the public. 2. Decision Support

Well-designed outputs provide actionable insights for o urban planning, resource management, disaster response, etc. 3. Data Sharing and Collaboration Outputs allow data and analysis results to be shared with o stakeholders across various fields and organizations. 4. Reporting and Documentation GIS outputs are often used in reports, presentations, and o publications for academic, governmental, and business purposes. 5. Public Engagement Attractive and clear visualizations help engage the public o in issues like environmental conservation or urban development. Factors to Consider When Designing Map Outputs To create effective and user-friendly outputs, several design principles and considerations must be followed: 1. Purpose of the Map Define the objective clearly: Is the map for analysis, navigation,  education, or decision-making? Example: A map for navigation might prioritize roads and  landmarks, while an environmental map focuses on vegetation and water bodies. 2. Audience Understand the needs and expertise of the target audience.  Example: A technical map for urban planners can include  detailed annotations, while a public map should use simple language and symbols. 3. Map Scale Choose an appropriate scale depending on the level of detail  required. Example: A large-scale map (1:10,000) for local zoning versus a  small-scale map (1:1,000,000) for regional planning. 4. Visual Design and Layout Symbology: Use clear, standardized symbols for features (e.g.,  blue for water, green for vegetation). Color Scheme: Use a logical color gradient for continuous data  (e.g., elevation) and distinct colors for categorical data (e.g., 5. Cartographic Elements Include essential elements such as:  Title: Describes the map’s purpose. o Legend: Explains symbols and colors. o Scale Bar: Indicates distance relationships. o North Arrow: Shows orientation. o Metadata: Provides information about the data source o and date. Downloaded by

6. Use of Technology Consider the medium of delivery:  Printed Maps: Focus on high resolution and clear labeling. o Digital Maps: Include interactive features like zooming o and layer toggling. Example: Web-based GIS applications allow dynamic outputs  for user interaction. 7. Legal and Ethical Considerations Acknowledge data sources and ensure data privacy, especially  for sensitive information. Example: Avoid displaying personal information in public maps.  Role of Multimedia in Enhancing GIS Applications Multimedia elements, such as images, videos, audio, animations, and interactive tools, enrich GIS applications by making spatial data more engaging, accessible, and informative. By integrating multimedia, GIS becomes a dynamic platform that not only conveys geospatial information but also enhances user experience, understanding, and decision-making. Key Roles of Multimedia in GIS 1. Improved Visualization Multimedia provides vivid and realistic representations of o geospatial data. Example: Using drone footage to overlay current imagery o onto a GIS map for urban planning. 2. Enhanced User Engagement Interactive elements, such as clickable maps or 3D o visualizations, keep users engaged. Example: Virtual reality (VR) tours of historical sites within o a GIS application. 3. Better Communication of Complex Data Animation and video can effectively illustrate temporal or o dynamic phenomena like traffic patterns or flood progression. 4. Education and Training Multimedia helps teach GIS concepts or systems by o combining text, videos, and interactive simulations. 5. Contextual Support Photos, videos, or audio clips provide additional context o to spatial features, making data interpretation more intuitive. 6. Facilitating Public Participation Multimedia GIS tools make complex geospatial data o accessible to non-technical audiences, encouraging participation in community projects. Examples of Multimedia Applications in GIS 1. Disaster Management Application: Multimedia-enhanced GIS can integrate live o video feeds and audio alerts to

monitor and manage disasters like wildfires or floods. Example: Combining satellite imagery with live drone o footage to assess damage in disaster-hit areas. 2. Urban Planning and Smart Cities Application: Interactive 3D city models with multimedia o overlays help stakeholders visualize proposed developments. Example: A 3D GIS platform with embedded videos o showing before-and-after visuals of urban redevelopment projects. 3. Environmental Monitoring Application: Use time-lapse animations to show o deforestation or climate changes over decades. Example: A GIS platform integrating satellite imagery, o videos, and audio commentary on biodiversity conservation. 4. Tourism and Cultural Heritage Application: Multimedia GIS applications create o interactive maps with videos, photos, and audio guides for tourists. Example: Mapping archaeological sites with virtual reality o reconstructions of ancient structures. 5. Education and Research Application: Augmented Reality (AR) GIS tools combine o geospatial data with interactive multimedia to teach geography, geology, or history. Example: An AR app that overlays geological information o onto the landscape when viewed through a smartphone camera. 6. Transportation and Navigation Application: Real-time traffic updates, video feeds from o highways, and audio navigation guides. Example: Multimedia GIS in navigation apps like Google o Maps or Waze, integrating traffic data and route visualization. 7. Public Health Application: Interactive maps showing the spread of o diseases with embedded videos explaining safety measures. Example: COVID-19 dashboards with heatmaps, live o statistics, and explanatory videos. Comparison of Enterprise GIS and Desktop GIS Enterprise GIS and Desktop GIS are two different approaches to managing and analyzing geospatial data, each designed to meet specific needs. They differ significantly in functionality, data management, and user access. Aspect Enterprise GIS Desktop GIS - Centralized system - Standalone system supporting organization- focused on individual wide GIS needs. user needs. -

Enables multi-user - Provides powerful tools Functionality collaboration. for geospatial analysis - Provides advanced web- and map creation. based and mobile GIS - Limited to desktop functionalities. applications. Data - Centralized data storage - Local data storage on Management in a server or database. individual machines. Aspect Enterprise GIS Desktop GIS - Supports large datasets, - Limited data handling real-time data, and capacity compared to complex workflows. enterprise systems. - Ensures data consistency - Risk of data duplication across the organization. and inconsistencies in multi-user environments. - Accessible to multiple users through web portals, - Limited to a single user mobile devices, or desktop at a time. User Access clients. - No built-in capability for - Role-based access control user collaboration or for security and access control. permissions. - Highly scalable; can integrate with enterprise - Limited scalability; systems like ERP or CRM. suitable for small-scale Scalability - Designed for large-scale, projects or individual multi-departmental tasks. projects. - High initial setup and maintenance costs due to - Lower cost for infrastructure and standalone licenses. Cost licensing. - Easier to set up and - Requires skilled IT and maintain. GIS staff for management. - Designed for - Primarily a single-user collaborative workflows Collaboration system with limited or no across teams or collaboration capabilities. departments. Aspect Enterprise GIS Desktop GIS - Real-time updates ensure all users work with the latest data. - Ideal for large - Suitable for individual organizations with users or small businesses extensive GIS needs, such Applications requiring advanced as governments, utilities, spatial analysis on a or multinational smaller scale. companies. Key Contrasts 1. Centralization vs. Decentralization Enterprise GIS emphasizes centralized data and tools for o broad access, while Desktop GIS focuses on local, standalone use. 2.

Multi-User vs. Single-User Enterprise GIS supports multiple simultaneous users, o while Desktop GIS is designed for individual use. 3. Web Integration Enterprise GIS integrates with web and mobile platforms, o while Desktop GIS is confined to desktop environments. Examples Enterprise GIS: ESRI’s ArcGIS Enterprise, GeoServer.  Desktop GIS: ESRI’s ArcGIS Pro, QGIS. Concept and Benefits of Distributed GIS Concept of Distributed GIS Distributed GIS refers to a system where GIS data, tools, and services are distributed across multiple computers, networks, or servers instead of being confined to a single device. This architecture allows users in different locations to access and process geospatial data collaboratively through the internet or intranet. Benefits of Distributed GIS 1. Scalability Enables handling of large datasets by distributing the o processing load across multiple systems. 2. Collaboration Facilitates multi-user access, allowing real-time o collaboration among geographically dispersed teams. Example: Urban planners from different regions working o on a single smart city project. 3. Data Accessibility Provides seamless access to data and tools from o anywhere via web services or cloud platforms. Example: GIS users accessing satellite imagery from o remote locations. 4. Cost Efficiency Reduces the need for high-end local hardware by o leveraging shared resources, including cloud-based systems. 5. Interoperability Integrates diverse GIS tools and datasets from various o sources, enhancing the breadth of analysis and applications. 6. Real-Time Data Integration Supports live data feeds, such as traffic updates or o weather data, for dynamic decision-making. Example of Application Disaster Management Systems  Scenario: During a natural disaster like a hurricane, o distributed GIS can integrate satellite imagery, real-time weather updates, and evacuation routes from multiple sources. Outcome: Emergency response teams across different o regions can access a unified platform, enabling faster

and more effective rescue operations. Importance of Map Compilation in GIS and Key Elements Importance of Map Compilation in GIS Map compilation is the process of collecting, organizing, and synthesizing geospatial data to create a map that effectively communicates specific information. It ensures that maps are accurate, readable, and tailored to their intended purpose. Benefits of Effective Map Compilation 1. Accuracy Ensures that spatial data is correctly represented, o reducing errors in decision-making. 2. Clarity Improves map readability, making it easier for users to o interpret data. 3. Relevance Focuses on including only the data necessary for the o map’s purpose, avoiding clutter. 4. Communication Serves as a powerful tool for conveying complex spatial o relationships and patterns. Key Elements in Map Compilation 1. Purpose Definition Clearly identify the goal of the map. o Example: A land-use map for urban planning will focus on o zoning and infrastructure details. 2. Data Selection and Preparation Choose relevant geospatial data layers (e.g., roads, rivers, o land parcels). Ensure data accuracy and compatibility. o 3. Generalization Simplify features to suit the map’s scale while retaining o essential details. Example: Representing a dense network of small roads as o a single line at a regional scale. 4. Symbology Use consistent and meaningful symbols, colors, and o patterns to represent features. Example: Blue for water bodies, green for forests. o 5. Cartographic Elements Include essential elements such as: o Title: Describes the map's focus.  Legend: Explains symbols and colors.  Scale Bar: Indicates distances.  North Arrow: Shows orientation.  Metadata: Provides information on data sources and  compilation date. 6. Layout Design Arrange map elements (map body, legend, title) for o balance and readability. 7. Quality Control Review the map for

accuracy, completeness, and o consistency before dissemination. Challenges of Data Management in GIS and Methods to Overcome Them Challenges of Data Management in GIS 1. Data Volume GIS often involves large datasets, including high-resolution o satellite imagery, 3D models, and sensor data, which can be difficult to store and process. 2. Data Accuracy and Quality Inconsistent, outdated, or incomplete data can lead to o errors in analysis and decision-making. Example: Using old cadastral data may result in incorrect o property boundaries. 3. Data Integration Combining datasets from various sources with different o formats, projections, or standards is challenging. 4. Metadata Management Lack of proper metadata makes it difficult to understand o the origin, quality, or relevance of datasets. 5. Data Security Protecting sensitive geospatial data from unauthorized o access or breaches is critical. 6. Version Control Keeping track of updates and changes in datasets is o challenging, especially in collaborative environments. 7. Cost and Resources Managing data storage, processing, and software licenses o can be expensive, especially for small organizations. Methods to Overcome These Challenges 1. Efficient Data Storage Solutions Use cloud-based or distributed storage systems for o scalability and cost-effectiveness. Example: Implementing platforms like Google Earth o Engine or ArcGIS Online for large datasets. 2. Data Cleaning and Validation Establish processes to clean, validate, and standardize o data before integration or analysis. Example: Use tools like Python scripts or GIS software for o quality checks. 3. Interoperability Standards Adhere to standards set by organizations like the Open o Geospatial Consortium (OGC) to ensure compatibility across systems. 4. Metadata Documentation Maintain comprehensive metadata for each dataset, o including details like source, date, accuracy, and format. 5. Access Control and Security Use role-based access control and encryption to protect

o sensitive data. Example: Implementing security features in ArcGIS o Enterprise or QGIS server. 6. Versioning and Backup Use version control systems or GIS platforms with built-in o version management to track changes. 7. Training and Resource Allocation Invest in staff training and modern software tools to o improve data management capabilities.  Vector to Raster Conversion Process and Its Benefits in GIS Process of Vector to Raster Conversion 1. Define the Raster Grid Specify the resolution and extent of the raster grid. o Example: A 10m x 10m grid for land-cover classification. o 2. Attribute Assignment Assign values to raster cells based on vector data o attributes. Example: For a land-use polygon, each cell within the o polygon boundary is assigned the corresponding land-use code. 3. Rasterization of Vector Features Convert vector geometries (points, lines, polygons) into o raster cells: Points: Single cells representing point locations.  Lines: Multiple cells approximating line paths.  Polygons: Filled cells within polygon boundaries.  4. Handle Overlaps and Conflicts Use rules to resolve overlaps, such as prioritizing certain o layers or attributes. 5. Export and Verify Save the raster dataset and verify its accuracy against the o original vector data.Situations Where Vector-to-Raster Conversion is Beneficial 1. Environmental Modeling Raster data is ideal for continuous phenomena like o elevation, temperature, or rainfall analysis. 2. Image Processing Many remote sensing applications work directly with o raster data, requiring vector data to be converted. 3. Cost Surface Analysis Raster grids are essential for creating cost surfaces used in o route optimization or resource allocation. 4. Overlay Analysis Rasters simplify overlay operations, such as combining o soil, land use, and slope data for agricultural planning. 5. Spatial Interpolation Raster formats are better suited

for interpolation o techniques, like kriging or IDW, to estimate values between known points. Advantages of Raster Data Efficient for large-scale analyses.  Compatible with remote sensing imagery and spatial modeling.  Simple data structure for continuous data representation.  Disadvantages Loss of detail and precision in boundaries compared to vector  data. Larger storage requirements for high-resolution rasters.

UNIT - 4 DATA QUALITY AND STANDARDS 4.1. VECTOR DATA ANALYSIS TOOLS A systematic examination of a problem or complex entity in order to provide new information from what is already known (ESRI – GIS Dictionary) Spatial analysis is the process that turns raw input spatial data into value-added useful data or information that ultimately supports decision making and reveals hidden or unknown patterns Common vector analysis tools are: • Buffering • Overlay • Other feature manipulation tools Buffering • Buffer – a region that is less than or equal to a specified distance • Can buffer points, lines and polygons used to examine proximity constraints? Example: • Identify potential customers within 3km of store • Identify parks within 10km of Islamabad Highway • Identify schools within 5 km of industrial zone 4.1.1. Buffer Analysis: • A buffer is a zone with a width created around a spatial feature and is measured in units of distance from the feature. The generated buffer takes the shape of the feature. • In case of a point the buffer is a circle (refer Figure 4.1 (a), with a radius equal to the buffer distance. In case of a line (refer Figure 4.1 (b), it is a band and for a polygon it is a belt of a specific buffer distance from the edge of polygon, surrounding the polygon. • The inward buffer for a polygon is called setback (refer Figure 4.1 (c), the polygon on the right hand side). 4.2 GIS • Buffering is used for neighborhood analysis which aims to evaluate the characteristics of the area surrounding the spatial feature. Figure.4.1. Buffer Analysis Diagram • Common examples of buffering include the identification of properties within a certain distance of an object, delineation of areas around natural features where human activities are restricted,

determination of areas affected by location etc. • Clip is used to subset a point, line or a polygon theme using another polygon theme as the boundary of the area of interest. • In the illustration above, the input, point feature shows the location of drinking water wells in three villages as shown in Figure 4.2. • To know how many wells fall in village 1, the input feature class is clipped using the boundary of the village 1. The output feature class shows that five wells are present in village 1(One). Figure.4.2. Drinking Water Wells in Three Villages • Split causes the input features to form subset of multiple output feature classes. The split field’s unique values form the names of the output feature classes. Fig.4.3. Polygon theme of Watershed Boundaries Data Quality and Standards 4.3 • In the illustration above, a point theme of wells is split using the polygon theme of watershed boundaries as shown in Figure 4.3. • The output of this operation contains multiple feature classes which are named on the unique value of watershed boundaries (in this case, the unique value is the watershed number WS1, WS2 etc.). • Each output class represents the number of wells present in a particular watershed i.e. WS1 or watershed 1 has three wells. Similarly, WS2, WS3 and WS4 have 3, 2, and 2 wells respectively. 4.1.2. Overlay Analysis • Union creates a new theme by overlaying two polygon themes. It is same as ‘or’ Boolean operator. The output theme contains the combined polygons and attributes of both themes. Only polygon themes can be combined using union as shown in Figure 4.4. . Fig.4.4. Overlay Analysis – Union • Let’s say we are interested in knowing no potential zone for urban development. It is clear that no construction

can be done on a water body or land covered by agriculture or forest. So, we can say union of areas under water, agriculture and forest would present us the area having no potential for urban development. • Intersect creates a new theme by overlaying a point, line or polygon theme with an intersecting polygon theme. It is same as ‘and’ Boolean operator. The output theme contains only the feature inside the intersecting polygons. Fig.4.5. Overlay Analysis – Intersect • From the same example given above, if we try to know the area having potential for • Urban development we need to intersect the polygon themes to get a common area which is not under water, agriculture or forest as shown in Figure 4.5. 4.4 GIS • From the same example given above, if we try to know the area having potential for urban development we need to intersect the polygon themes to get a common area which is not under water, agriculture or forest. 4.1.3. Feature Manipulation Dissolve Append Select Clip Data Quality and Standards 4.5 Erase Split 4.2. DATA ANALYSIS TOOLS • The Analysis toolbox contains a powerful set of tools that perform the most fundamental GIS operations. With the tools in this toolbox, you can perform overlays, create buffers, calculate statistics, perform proximity analysis, and much more. Whenever you need to solve a spatial or statistical problem, you should always look in the Analysis toolbox. • The Analysis toolbox has four toolsets. Each toolset performs specific GIS analysis of feature data. Toolsets Description Extract GIS datasets often contain more data than you need. The Extract tools let you select features and attributes in a feature class or table based on a query (SQL expression) or spatial extraction. The output features and attributes are stored in a feature

class or table. Overlay The Overlay toolset contains tools to overlay multiple feature classes to combine, erase, modify, or update spatial features, resulting in a new feature class. New information is created when overlaying one set of features with another. There are six types of overlay operations; all involve joining two existing sets of features into a single set of features to identify spatial relationships between the input features. Proximity The Proximity toolset contains tools that are used to determine the proximity of features within one or more feature classes or between two feature classes. These tools can identify features that are closest to one another or calculate the distances between or around them. 4.6 GIS Statistics The Statistics toolset contains tools that perform standard statistical analysis (such as mean, minimum, maximum, and standard deviation) on attribute data as well as tools that calculate area, length, and count statistics for overlapping and neighboring features. 4.3. NETWORK ANALYSIS It is a type of line analysis which involves set of interconnected lines. Railways, highways, transportation routes, rivers etc are examples of networks. Network analysis is used to find the shortest alternated routes between origins to destination Network Analyst provides network based spatial analysis tools for solving complex routing problems. Modeling in GIS Highway alignment studies: 4.3.1. Highway Alignment The position or the layout of the centre line of the highway on the ground is called the alignment. The Horizontal Alignment includes the straight path, the horizontal deviations and curves. Changes in gradient curves are covered under vertical alignment of roads. A new road should be aligned very carefully as improper alignment would result in one or more of the following disadvantages: 1) Increase in construction cost 2) Increase in maintenance cost 3) Increase in vehicles operation cost 4) Increase in accident rate.

The basic requirements of an ideal alignment between two terminal stations are that it should be: 1) Short 2) Easy 3) Safe 4) Economical 4.3.2. Factor affecting Highway Alignment: The various factors which control the highway alignment in general may be listed as: 1) Obligatory points 2) Traffic 3) Geometric design 4) Economics 5) Other considerations In hill roads additional care has to be given for: Stability- 6) Drainage Data Quality and Standards 4.7 4.3.3. Stages of New Highway Project: 1) Selection of route, finalization of highway alignment and geometric design details. 2) Collection of materials and testing of subgrade soil and other construction material, mix design of pavement materials and design details of pavement layer. 3) Construction stages including quality control. 4.3.4. Steps Involved in a New Highway Project: 1) Map study 2) Reconnaissance Survey 3) Preliminary survey 4) Location of Final Alignment 5) Detailed survey 6) Material survey 7) Design 8) Earth work 9) Pavement Construction 10) Construction 4.3.5. Need of Study The conventional method of highway alignment is a tedious and time consuming process • The conventional highway alignment needs a lot of manual work and expensive • Remote sensing and Geographical information system makes the highway alignment easier. It needs less man power, • less time consuming and economic. 4.3.6. Objectives of study The objectives of the present study are as follows, • To identify the factors that influence on highway alignment studies • To prepare the thematic layers based on the identified factors • To analyses the traffic volume and future expansion. • To identify the favorable route for highway alignment. 4.3.7. Methodology • The base (study area) map, Drainage, Slope and Contour maps were prepared with the help of SOI Topo-sheet (on 1:50,000 scale). 4.8 GIS • IRS LISS III satellite data was used

and by using Digital Image Processing techniques the following thematic maps such as geomorphology, Land use/ Land Cover were generated as shown in the figure.5.22. • The DEM is used in order to understand the terrain condition, environmental factors and social economic status in this study area. • The factors considered are mainly related to the land use, geology, land value and soil. The weights and ranks are assigned to each of the above themes, according to expert opinions, for GIS analysis. After assigning weights and ranks these themes are overlaid to get an overlaid map. • Finally, possible/feasible route was identified based on various physical and cultural parameters and their inherent properties. • The cost reduction analysis was also done for substantiating the formation of highway. Finally, possible/feasible route was identified based on various physical and cultural parameters and their inherent properties. The cost reduction analysis was also done for substantiating the formation of highway. Figure.5.22. Methodology • The main purpose of traffic survey are traffic monitoring, traffic control and management, traffic enforcement, traffic forecasting, model calibration and validating etc. • The purpose of caring out traffic volume count are designing, improving traffic system, planning, management. • The traffic volume count study is carried out to get following useful information. Magnitudes, classifications and the time and directional split of vehicular flows Data Quality and Standards 4.9 • Proportion of vehicles in traffic stream - Hourly, daily, yearly and seasonal variation of vehicular flows • Flow fluctuation on different approaches at a junction or different parts of a road network system. • Network analysis is used to find the shortest alternated routes between origins to destination Network Analyst provides network-based spatial analysis tools for solving complex routing problems. 4.3.8. Conclusion • The purpose of this study was to develop a

tool to locate a suitable less time consuming, shortest route between two points. • The GIS approach using ground parameters and spatial analysis provided to achieve this goal. Raster based map analysis provide a wealth of capabilities for incorporating terrain information surrounding linear infrastructure. • Costs resulting from terrain, geomorphology, land use, drainage and elevation resulting the shortest routes for the study area. • Results indicate that the route which was designed applying GIS method is avoid traffic problems, less time consuming more environmentally effective, and cheaper. • This proposed shortest route provides traffic free, pollution free, risk free, operating for movement of vehicle passing from chettikullam to kottar. • Time and consumption of fuel will also be reduced considerably. GIS method can also be used for route determination for irrigation, drainage channels, power lines and railways. 4.4. TWO MODELS OF DIGITAL EDUCATION From the introduction of the World Wide Web in 1993 the young of the world have experienced two models of digital education, that outside the school walls and that within. Outside the young and the digitally connected families of the world employed – unseen – the naturally evolving laissez faire model. Within the school the young worked within the traditional, highly structured model. 4.10 GIS It is time the difference is understood, the global success and benefits of the laissez faire recognised and lauded, and the serious shortcomings of the highly structured understood and addressed. For much of the period the two models ran in parallel, with most schools showing little or no interest in the out of school digital education. Around 2010 – 2012 the scene began to change when a handful of digitally mature schools began genuinely collaborating with their families in the 24/7/365 digital education of the children. Those schools had reached the evolutionary

stage where their teaching model and culture closely mirrored that of the families. They revealed what was possible with collaboration. That said it took time for that collaboration to take hold more widely and for the most part the parallel models continue in operation today, with the difference between the in and out of school teaching growing at pace. It is surely time for schools and government to question the retention of the parallel modes and to ask if taxpayers are getting value for the millions upon millions spent solely on schools when the digitally connected families receive no support. Might it be time to employ a more collaborative approach where the schools complement and add value to the contribution of the families? Without going into detail, it bears reflecting on the distinguishing features of the learning environment and digital education model, of both the digitally connected family and the school, and asking what is the best way forward, 4.4.1. The learning environments. Digitally connected families That of the families we know well. It has been built around the home’s warmth and support, and the priority the parents attached to their children having a digital education that would improve their education and life chances. The focus has always been on the child – the individual learner – with the children from the outset being provided the current technology by their family and empowered to use that technology largely unfettered. Importantly the family as a small regulating unit, with direct responsibility for a small number of children could readily trust each, and monitor, guide and value their learning from birth onwards, assisting ensure each child had use of the current technology and that the use was wise and balanced. The learning occurred within a freewheeling, dynamic, market driven, naturally evolving environment,

anywhere, anytime, just in time and invariably in context. Those interested could operate at the cutting edge and the depth desired. Very early on the young’s use of the digital was normalized, with the learning occurring as a natural part of life, totally integrated, with no regard for boundaries Data Quality and Standards 4.11 The time available to the digitally connected family was – and continues to be – at least four/five times greater than that in the school. It was too many seemingly chaotic, but also naturally evolving. Very quickly the family learning environment became collaborative, socially networked, global in its outlook, highly enjoyable and creative where the young believed anything was possible. By the latter 2000’s most families had created – largely unwittingly – their own increasingly integrated and sophisticated digital ecosystem, operating in the main on the personal mobile devices that connected all in the family to all manner of other ecosystems globally. 4.4.2. Digital learning in the school. The general feature of the school digital learning environment has been invariably one of unilateral control, where the ICT experts controlled every facet of the technology and its teaching. They chose, configured and controlled the use of both the hardware and software, invariably opting for one device, one operating system and a standard suite of applications. The students were taught within class groups, using highly structured, sequential, teacher directed, regularly assessed instructional programs. The school knew best. The clients – the parents and students – were expected to acquiesce. There was little or no recognition of the out of school learning or technology or desire to collaborate with the digitally connected families. The teaching was insular, inward looking, highly site fixated. In reflecting on school’s teaching with the digital between 1993 and 2016 there was an all- pervasive

sense of constancy, continuity, with no real rush to change. There was little sense that the schools were readying the total student body to thrive within in a rapidly evolving digitally based world. Significantly by 2016 only a relatively small proportion of schools globally were operating as mature digital organizations, growing increasingly integrated, powerful higher order digitally based ecosystems. The reality was that while the learning environment of the digitally connected families evolved naturally at pace that of most schools changed only little, with most schools struggling to accommodate rapid digital evolution and transformation. 4.4.3. The teaching models With the advantage of hindsight, it is quite remarkable how hidden the laissez faire model has remained for twenty plus years, bearing in mind it has been employed globally since the advent of the WWW. 4.12 GIS For years, it was seen simply as a different, largely chaotic approach used by the kids – with the focus being on the technological breakthroughs and the changing practices rather than on the underlying model of learning that was being employed. It wasn’t until the authors identified and documented the lead role of the digitally connected families of the world did we appreciate all were using basically the same learning approach. The pre-primary developments of the last few years affirmed the global application of the model. We saw at play a natural model that was embraced by the diverse families of the world. All were using the same model – a naturally evolving model where the parents were ‘letting things take their own course ‘(OED). The learning was highly individualized, with no controls other than the occasional parent nudge. That said the learning was simultaneously highly collegial, with the young calling upon and collaborating with their siblings, family members, peers and social networks when desired.

Interestingly from early on the young found themselves often knowing more about the technology in some areas than their elders – experiencing what Tapscott (1998) termed an ‘inverted authority’ – being able to assist them use the technology. Each child was free to learn how to use, and apply those aspects of the desired technologies they wanted, and to draw upon any resources or people if needed. In the process the children worldwide – from as young as two – directed their own learning, opting usually for a discovery based approach, where the learning occurred anytime, anywhere 24/7/365. Most of the learning was just in time, done in context and was current, relevant, highly appealing and intrinsically motivating. Invariably it was highly integrated, with no thought given to old boundaries – like was it educational, entertainment, communication, social science or history. In contrast the school digital teaching model has always been highly structured and focused on what the school or education authority ‘experts’ believed to be appropriate. Throughout the period the teaching has been unilaterally controlled, directed by the classroom teacher, with the students disempowered, distrusted and obliged to do as told. The teaching built upon linear, sequential instructional programs where the digital education was invariably treated like all other subjects, shoehorned into an already crowded curriculum and continually assessed. Some authorities made the ‘subject’ compulsory, others made it optional. The focus – in keeping with the other ‘subjects’ in the curriculum – was academic. There was little interest in providing the young the digital understanding for everyday life. The teaching took place within a cyber walled community, at the time determined by the teaching program. Data Quality and Standards 4.13 Increasingly the course taught and assessed became dated and irrelevant. In considering why the young and the digitally connected

families of the world have embraced the laissez faire model of digital education aside from the young’s innate curiosity and desire to learn we might do well to examine the model of digital learning we have used over the last twenty plus years and reflect on how closely it approximates that adopted by the young. Might they be following that ancient practice of modelling the behavior of their parents? 4.4.4. The way forward Near a quarter of a century on since the introduction of the WWW and an era of profound technological and social change it is surely time for governments and educators globally to • Publicly recognise the remarkable success of the digitally connected families and the laissez faire teaching model in the 24/7/365 digital education of both the children and the wider family • Understand the digitally connected families are on trend to play an even greater lead role • identify how best to support the family’s efforts without damaging the very successful teaching model employed • Consider how best to enhance the educational contribution of all the digitally connected families in the nation, including the educationally disadvantaged • Rethink the existing, somewhat questionable contribution of most schools and the concept of schools as the sole provider of digital education for the young • Examine where scarce taxpayer monies can best be used to improve the digital education in the networked world. Let us all finally recognize the core qualities and the remarkable global success of the laissez faire digital education model and build upon its achievements. 4.5. 3D DATA COLLECTION AND UTILIZATION Geographic Information Science (GIS) offers powerful tools for performing detailed analysis of spatial information and solving complex problems. Traditional GIS data is based on mapping in two dimensions, an x and y-value, which can be

limiting in some applications. Utilizing 3D GIS software lets users engage with data from a whole new perspective that results in more nuanced insights and detailed visualizations. • 3D GIS bring enhanced depth into data collection and analysis by incorporating a z- value into mapping. Most commonly, that means including elevation data, but users have many options for adding layers of information. For instance, a map might include a dimension based on the concentrations of certain chemicals and minerals or which parcels of land are best suited for development. Working with three dimensions, GIS professionals can often apply their findings to address real-world issues with greater accuracy. • While 3D models are more difficult to create and maintain than 2D ones, there are myriad 3D GIS applications where this technology is greatly beneficial. These four 4.14 GIS examples demonstrate how an investment in 3D GIS modeling can generate added value: 4.5.1. City Planning Cities have a way of growing to encompass previously under- or undeveloped areas in a process often called urbanization or urban sprawl. There are many reasons behind urban sprawl, including a desire to build improved infrastructure, affordable land or tax rates, or overcrowding inside the city. Urban sprawl can have a major impact on people who decide to leave the city as well as those who remain. For example, as residents move farther away from the city center, infrastructure such as roads or public transportation systems must accommodate their commutes, and traffic can lead to higher rates of air pollution. To minimize the negative impacts of urban sprawl and increased development, it’s important for city planners to carefully determine the best way to grow urban areas. Urban development needs to take into consideration today’s requirements, potential changes in demand and the long-term effects of building upward and

outward. 3D GIS software can help city planners visualize what their proposed changes will look like and predict the outcomes for current residents and future generations. One example was the 2012 revitalization of the Mulheim Sud district in Cologne, Germany, located on the Rhine River. The project set out to make the district, which included a mix of residential, commercial and industrial buildings, more environmentally friendly over the course of two decades. A 3D model spotlighted building information, aerial photos, energy performance, air pollution, lidar elevation data, noise and traffic. The wide range of integrated information allowed architects, planning engineers and others to collaborate effectively. As the district develops further, the 3D model will help future planners with energy and environmental modeling and guide public participation initiatives. 4.5.2. Building Information Modeling Building information modeling (BIM) is a technology that generates digital representations of facilities and relevant processes. BIM has given facilities managers the ability to closely review structures, beginning with the construction planning phase. Data Quality and Standards 4.15 Used in conjunction with 3D GIS data, BIM can help create robust building management plans and allow for more detailed analysis. For example, before breaking ground on a construction project, stakeholders can review findings from GIS and BIM to draw conclusions about environmental impact, sustainability, disaster readiness and how to optimize the use of assets and space. BIM and 3D GIS can also come together to support the preservation and restoration of historical buildings. An effort to digitally record cultural heritage sites in Dublin, Ireland, drew on Historic Building Information Modeling (HBIM) and 3D GIS to document and analyze selected locations. One project focused on restoring buildings along Henrietta Street, which dates its earliest construction to 1730. By the 21st century, the street was lined with buildings in serious need of

care. HBIM technology made it possible to map the extent of the damage and visualize what the area looked like when new. Researchers employed GIS tools to note attributes of individual buildings like the years of construction and address information. In the process, they developed a store of information that could be used to generate in-depth visualizations or guide tourists. 4.5.3. Coastal Modeling and Analysis A nation’s coastline is a crucial gateway for imports and exports, and about 40 percent of the world’s population lives within 60 miles of a coast. But these areas also pose numerous challenges for development. Its critical for planners to understand the factors that affect construction and maintenance for shipping ports, fisheries, mineral mining operations and wilderness preservation areas. Responsible coastal development must be informed by underwater topography, local vegetation and predictions for the long-term environmental impact. Resource planning systems that draw on GIS can provide insights into the economic, environmental and cultural results of activities along the coast. The right data makes all the difference in sustainably performing operations like construction or excavation. When preparing for the extraction of resources on the coastline, organizations benefit from synthesizing information like: • Findings from 3D GIS mapping that suggest the likely outcomes of dredging material in the water • Lidar topographical surveys • Data sets from past extraction activities • Trends in coastal change 4.5.4. Wind Farm Assessment Planning a wind farm requires a detailed analysis of an environment and the potential effects of the structures. By using 3D GIS modeling, planners and other stakeholders can get a better idea of the impact from wind farm development on wildlife and people. 4.16 GIS For example, when assessing possible wind farm locations in two dimensions, a bird’s migratory path might make a location seem inaccessible. However, reviewing

that same space using 3D GIS data may reveal that the elevation of birds’ flight paths and the height of the wind farm are compatible. In Switzerland, developers wanted to find a way to accurately determine the noise that would be generated from the installation of a new wind farm. A team developing a visual-acoustic simulation tool decided to study Mont Crosin in the Canton of Bern, Switzerland, which is home to 16 wind turbines. The researchers analyzed recordings taken on days with varying wind and weather conditions and wind speed measurements taken with a 3D ultrasonic anemometer. They generated 3D models representing vegetation, infrastructure and the wind turbines themselves. The data allowed planners to predict the noise and environmental impact that would be produced by the proposed wind farm.

